Page 1:
ceived on 16/3 )24
www. Livelaw . IN
India non judicial
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
e-Stamp
error from
Certificate No. # IN-4166761270491377
Certificate issued Date # 15-Feb-2021 01:00 PM
Account Reference : IMPACC (IVY d18570031 DELHIV DL-DL
Unique Doc. Reference : SUBIN-DL85700393536333416258
Purchased by # ZOSTEL HOSPITALITY PRIVATE LIMITED
state . Our-visory or Edinburgh
Description of Document : Article 12 Award
Property Description : Not Applicable
Consederation Price ( As. ) #
( Zero ) .
First Party : " ZOSTEL HOSPITALITY PRIVATE LIMITED
Second Party # ORAVELSTAYS PRIVATE LIMITED
Stamp Duty Paid By : ZOSTEL HOSPITALITY PRIVATE LIMITED
Stamp Duty Amount ( Rs. ) # 500
( Five Hundred only )
ext.
Please write or type below this line ...
arbitration between
Zostel hospitality PVT. Ltd. and Mrs.
versus .
ORAVEL STARS PVT. LTD.
1 .
Starmory Alert :
# S # # #
# CHICK CHENNING the legitimacy is on the users of the certificate .
# 100s may discrepancy please inform the Competent Authority .

Page 2:
www. Livelaw . IN
before the Arbitral Tribunal comprising of
Hon'ble Mr. Justice A.M. Ahmadi ( Retd. )
former Chief Justice of India
sole arbitrator
in the matter of :
Zostel hospitality PVT. Ltd. and Mrs.
versus .
ORAVEL STARS PVT. LTD.
Counsels :
For Claimants :
Mr. Arun Kathpalia , Senior Advocate
Mr. Abhishek Malhotra , Advocate
Mr. Krishnendu Datta , Advocate
Mr. Deepak Biswas , Advocate
Ms. Shilpa Gannani , Advocate
Ms. Atmaja Tripathy , Advocate
Mr. Gurmukh Shiv Choudhuri , Advocate
2

Page 3:
www. Livelaw . IN
For Respondent :
Mr. Salman Khurshid , Senior Advocate
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi , Senior Advocate
Mr. V. Srinivasa Raghavan , Senior Advocate
MR.P.V. Kapur , Senior Advocate
Mr. Sandeep Grover , Advocate
Mr. Avimukt Dar , Advocate
Mr. Mayank Mishra , Advocate
Mr. Mohit Chadha , Advocate
Ms. Vaishnavi Rao , Advocate
Ms. Rithika Ravikumar , Advocate
Ms. Pterna Sharma , Advocate
Ms. Swati Mittal , Advocate
Ms. Madhavi Khanna , Advocate
Mr. Abhimup Paul Bangara , Advocate
Mr. Zafar Khurshid , Advocate
Ms. Aadya Mishra , Advocate
Ms. Sakshi Katiyal , Advocate
Ms. Jyoti Singh , Advocate
Ms. Mahima Rathi , Advocate to assist the Arbitral Tribunal .
1 . Original Award received by the Claimants ) authorized agent .
2 . Copy of the Award received by the Respondent/authorized agent .
3 .

Page 4:
www. Livelaw . IN
award
1 . Disputes arose between Claimants and Respondent in respect of Term
Sheet dated 25.11.2015 . Clause 16 of the said Term Sheet contained an
arbitration clause , pursuant to which Claimant No.1 approached the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Arbitration Petition ( Civil ) No. 28/2018
and sought appointment of an Arbitrator under Section 11 (6 ) of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act , 1996 ( Hereinafter referred to as ' the Act
Vide order dated 19.09.2018 , the Hon'ble Supreme Court constituted this
Arbitral Tribunal appointing me as the Sole Arbitrator .
2 . Brief Facts leading to the institution of the present proceedings by the
Claimants are that Term Sheet dated 25.11.2015 ( hereinafter referred to
as the ' Term Sheet ' ) was executed between Claimant Nos. 1 & 2 and the
Respondent for the purpose of acquisition of assets of Claimant No.1
including Intellectual property Rights , Software , key employees etc. by the
Respondent . It is the Claimants' case that they acted upon the Term
Sheet , fulfilled all the obligations stipulated therein and transferred their
business to the Respondent . Claimants claim to be aggrieved by the acts
and emissions of the Respondent and the breach of terms and conditions
of the Term Sheet due to which the acquisition process could not be
formally concluded and the same deprived them of the benefits that were
due to accrue to them upon completion of the acquisition process as
4

Page 5:
www. Livelaw . IN
envisaged in the Term Sheet . The Respondent has refuted the Claimants'
case and inter alia submitted that the Term Sheet was merely exploratory ,
non-binding in nature and stood terminated . Due Diligence process
contemplated under the Term Sheet was never completed and Definitive
Documents , which were a side que non for completion of the acquisition
process were never executed . Therefore , the claimants are not entitled to
any relief .
3 . Claimants have prayed for the following reliefs against the Respondent in
their Statement of Claim :
i. Specifically perform its obligation agreed upon the Term Sheet by
transferringlissuing , in the name of Claimants 7% of the present
shareholding of the Respondent in favour of Claimant Nos. 2-17 , pro rated
to their respective shareholding of Claimant No. 1 ;
ii . Pay the agreed contracted amount of USD 1million to the Founders i.e.
Claimant Nos. 4-10 ; or
iii . In the alternative and without prejudice to the claims in paragraphs 7 ( i )
and ( ii ) above , pay to the Claimants , jointly , in the amount equivalent to
7% of the value of Respondent company as per the last round of funding
received by the Respondent , along with USD 1 million to Claimant Nos. 4-
10 , reflecting the benefit of bargain as promised by Respondent to the
Claimants ;
and
iv. Pay interest Q1896 per annum from the date of execution of Term Sheet
till date of payment , on the due amount of USD 1 million to Claimant Nos .
4-10 ; and
v. Pay damages for loss of goodwill and reputation as well as inconvenience
caused to the Claimants , in the amount of USD 17 million ; AND
vi. Pay for the costs of the present proceedings ; AND
5 .

Page 6:
www. Livelaw . IN
Pass any such order as the Hon'ble Tribunal may deem fit in the facts of
the case .
4 . The Claimants sought the following additional alternate reliefs in their
Replication :
a. Reject the Statement of Defence in its entirety ; AND
b. Pass final award in favour of Claimants and against Respondent , in terms
of prayer sought in the Statement of Claim of the Claimants ; ANDIOR
c. Pass an award in favour of Claimant No.1 , in the alternative , for
of USD 88,922,768- ( Eighty-Eight Million Nine Hundred Twenty-
Thousand Seven Hundred Sixty-Eight Only ) along with interest at the rate
of 24% per annum from March 31 , 2016 till the date of payment thereof ;
andior
d. Pass such further orders as the Morrible Tribunal may deem fit in the facts
of the case .
The Respondent was permitted to file a Sur-Rejoinder to the Replication .
5 . Thereafter , following issues were framed .
1 . Whether the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider or entertain the
claims of Claimants Nos. 3 to 17 ?
2 . Whether Claimant Nos. 2 and 3 have waived their rights to raise any
claims in the present arbitration and hence their claims are not
maintainable ?
3 . In the event of Claimant Nos. 2 to 17 not being entitled to maintain their
claim , whether Claimant No. 1 is entitled to claiming for the relief of
allotment of shares from the Respondent to Claimant Nos. 2 to 17 and the
payment of USD 1million dollars to Claimants No. 4 to 10 ?
6

Page 7:
www. Livelaw . IN
4 . Whether the term sheet dated 26.11.2015 is non-binding as stated in
whether it is a binding , valid and enforceable agreement in terms of the
acts of the parties as alleged by the Claimants ?
5 . Whether there was consensus at idem between the parties on the Draft
Definitive Agreements stipulated under clause 7 of the Term Sheet dated
26.11.2015 ?
6 . Whether as asserted by the Claimants they were ready and willing to
perform their obligations under the Term Sheet dated 26.1.2015 and to
execute the draft definitive agreements contemplated under the Term
Sheet ?
7 . Whether the transaction (s ) as contemplated in the Term Sheet dated
26.11.2015 has been consummed and the Claimants have performed
conditions detailed in the Term Sheet dated 26.1.2015 ?
8 . Whether the claimants prove that there was breach of contract in terms of
the Term Sheet dated 26.11.2015 by the Respondent ?
9 . Whether the Claimants are entitled to specific performance of the Term
Sheet dated 26.11.2015 by directing the Respondent to issue 7% of the
present shareholding of the Respondent in favour of Claimant No.2 to 17
pro-rated to their respective shareholding of Claimant No. 1 ?
10 . Whether the Claimants No.4 to 10 are entitled to the payment of USD 1
million dollars ?
11 . Whether as an alternative to specific performance , Claimants are entitled
to an amount equivalent to 7% of the value of the Respondent as per the
last round of funding received by the Respondent along with USD 1 million
dollars to Claimant Nos. 4 to 10 ?
12 . Whether Claimants No. 4 to 10 are entitled to interest on the amount of
USD 1million from the date of execution of the Term Sheet , if so for what
period and at what rate ?
13 . Whether the Claimants prove loss of goodwill and are entitled to damages
to the extent of 17million USD ?
7 .

Page 8:
www. Livelaw . IN
14 . Whether the Claimant No.1 is entitled in the alternative for payment of
USD 8,89,22,768- as claimed in the Replication ?
15 . Who should bear the cost and if so to what amount ?
16 . To what reliefs are parties entitled ?
6 . Parties were heard at length . Arguments advanced in respect of each
issue , along with findings of this Arbitral Tribunal , are as under :
Issue No. 1 : Whether the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider
or entertain the claims of Claimants Nos. 3 to 17 ?
Mr. Abhishek Malhotra , Learned Counsel for the Claimants argued that
Claimant Nos. 3 to 17 have been validly arrayed as parties in view of the
settled law and this Arbitral Tribunal has the jurisdiction to entertain their
claims . This argument was based on three main premises :
a . It is settled law that non-signatories to the Arbitration Agreement can be
arrayed as parties to the arbitration .
b. The Arbitration Clause in the Term Sheet has wide amplitude and includes
the claims of Claimant Nos. 3 to 17 .
c. Arbitration proceedings have been validly initiated by the Claimants .
In support of their submissions , Claimants inter alia relied upon clause 16
of the Term Sheet and order dated 19.08.2019 passed by this Tribunal
dismissing Respondent's application under Section 16 of the Act , vice
which Claimant Nos. 3-17 were allowed to participate in the proceedings .
An article written by William W. Park titled ' Non-Signatories and
International Contracts : An Arbitrator's Dilemma was also relied upon .
Judgments passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Chloro Controls India
Pvt. Ltd. vs. Seventh Trent Water Purification Inc. and Ors. (
641 ) , Cheran Properties Limited vs. Kasturi and Sons Limited and Others
(2018 ) 16 SCC 413 ) , RVR Solutions v. Ajay Kumar Dix
8

Page 9:
www. Livelaw . IN
SCC Online Del 6591 ) , Duro Felguera , S.A. vs
( 2017 ) 9 SCC 729 ) , Maharishi Dayanand University and Air vs
Coop. UC Society Ltd. and Ann. ( 2007 ) 5 SCC 295 ) ,
Limited vs . Moorgate Industries India Pvt. Ltd (0MP ( ) Comm.
Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. vs. General Electric Company and Ann. ( 1984 )
4 SCC 679 ) , State of Goa vs. Praveen Enterprises ( 2012
were also relied upon .
Mr. Salman Khurshid , Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent refuted
the submissions made by the Claimants and argued that no arbitration
agreement subsists between Claimant Nos. 3-17 and the Respondent . He
further submitted that :
a. A non-signatory third party cannot be made party to an arbitration
proceeding .
b. Judgments passed in Chloro Controls ( supra ) and Cheran Properties
( supra ) do not apply to the facts and circumstances of the present matter
and are distinguish from the present case .
c. The power to implead third parties lies exclusively with the Courts and not
with the Arbitral Tribunal . Therefore , allowing the claims of Claimant Nos .
3-17 would tantamount to exceeding jurisdiction .
d. Arbitration had not been initiated by the said Claimant Nos. 3-17 in
accordance with the Act and the said Claimants have not filed a petition
under Section 11 of the Act seeking appointment of an arbitrator .
In support of its submissions , Respondent relied upon various judgments
including V.G. Santhosam & Others . Vs. Shanthi Gnan
( 2020 ) 5 MLJ198 , Deutsche Post Bank Home Finance Ltd. vs. Taduri
Sridhar & Others . ( 2011 ) 11 SCC 375 , Balmer Lawrie &
Saraswathi Chemicals Propriators Saraswathi Leather Chemical ( P ) Ltd
239(2017 ) DLT 217 , Sudhir Gapi vs. IGNOU ( 2017
9

Page 10:
www. Livelaw . IN
Indowind Energy Limited vs. Wescare ( India ) Ltd. & Ors. (
Alupro Building Systems Pv. Ltd. vs. Ozone Overseas Pvt. Ltd
DRJ 412 etc.
The Respondent laid stress upon Alupro Building Systems Pvt. Ltd. vs.
Ozone Overseas Pvt. Ltd. ( 2017 ) 162 DRJ 412 which has held
under Section 21 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act , 1996 is
mandatory to initiate arbitration proceedings . Relevant portion of the said
judgment reads as under :
" Thus , the inescapable conclusion on a proper interpretation
of Section 21 of the Act is that in the absence of an
agreement to the contrary , the notice under Section 21 of the
Act by the claimant invoking the arbitration clause , preceding
the reference of disputes to arbitration , is mandatory . In other
words , without such notice , the arbitration proceedings that
are commenced would be unsustainable in law . " ( Para 30 )
In response , Claimants relied upon the judgment of State of Goa vs .
Praveen Enterprises ( supra ) to support their contention that a notice
under Section 21 of the Act is for the purpose of limitation and to intimate
the Respondent that disputes have arisen . It was also submitted that the
requirements under the Act have been complied with as Claimant No. 1
had sent notice dated 25.02.2018 to the Respondent intimating that
disputes had arisen .
In the considered opinion of this Tribunal , the decision in Praveen
Enterprises ( supra ) is of no assistance as the said judgment dealt with the
requirement of a Notice under Section 21 vis-a-vis counter claims . The
said judgment is not applicable to the facts of the present dispute .
Therefore , in view of the law laid down in Alupro Building Systems Pvt.
10

Page 11:
www. Livelaw . IN
Ltd. ( supra ) and in view of the fact that the mandatory requirement of
Section 21 of the Act has not been complied with by Claimant Nos. 3 to
17 , this Tribunal holds that it has no jurisdiction to consider or entertain the
claims of Claimant Nos. 3-17 .
As the mandatory requirement of Section 21 has not been complied with ,
examination of other aspects pertaining to arrange of non-signatories as
parties and the nature of the arbitration clause is an academic exercise
and does not warrant further examination .
Issue No. 2 : Whether Claimant Nos. 2 and 3 have waived their rights
to raise any claims in the present arbitration and hence their claims
are not maintainable ?
Mr. Malhotra , Learned Counsel for the Claimants submitted that neither
Claimant No. 2 nor Claimant No. 3 had waived their rights to raise a claim
before this Tribunal . It was submitted that Claimant No. 2 was not only a
signatory to the Term Sheet but also a beneficiary to the Transaction . It
was added as a Proforma Respondent in the Petition under Section 11 of
the Act before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and had expressed its consent
for appointment of Arbitrator suggested by Claimant No. 1 wide letter dated
27.09.2018 .
The personal involvement of Claimant No. 3 in the negotiations ,
discussions pertaining to execution of the Term Sheet and at every stage
of the transaction was relied upon to state that Claimant No. 3 had not
waived its rights to prefer a claim before this Arbitral Tribunal .
Tribunal's attention was drawn by the Claimants to the fact that the
Respondent's submissions were contrary to its pleadings before Hon'tble
Delhi High Court and Supreme Court . Pleadings filed by the Respondent
1 1 .

Page 12:
www. Livelaw . IN
before Hon'ble Delhi High Court and Supreme Court were relied upon to
state that Claimant Nos. 2 and 3 were admitted beneficiaries and
necessary and proper parties to the Arbitration . Therefore , the
Respondent could not approlate and reprobate before different forums .
Mr. Salman Khurshid , Learned Senior Counsel rebutted the argument
advanced by the Claimants and submitted that the arbitration petition
before the Supreme Court was preferred only by Claimant No. 1 . Claimant
No.2 was only a proforma Respondent and did not enter appearance
before the Supreme Court . Also , Claimant No.2 had not been referred to
the present proceedings by the Supreme Court . Regarding letter dated
26.07.2018 , it was submitted that the said letter records the factum of
disputes having arisen only between Claimant No. 1 and the Respondent
This was supported by the notice invoking arbitration dated 25.01.2018
which was issued only by Claimant No. 1 and not the other Claimants .
Pleadings filed by Claimant No.3 before the Delhi High Court we relied
upon to state that there had been a categorical waiver by Claimant No. 3
who submitted that it will not be a Claimant in the Statement of Claim . It
was only after the Respondent raised objections that the Claimants are
rescinding from the waivers extended by them . Hence , Claimant Nos. 2
and 3 cannot maintain their claims .
Without going into the merits of the arguments advanced and in view of
the findings given in issue No. 1 , this Tribunal does not consider it fit to
entertain the claims of Claimant No. 3 . Claimant No.2 , though a
to the Term Sheet , has not served a Notice under Section 21 to the
Respondent . Therefore , it cannot raise any claims before this Arbitral
Tribunal . Hence , claims of Claimant Nos. 2 and 3 are not maintainable
before this Arbitral Tribunal .
1 2 .

Page 13:
www. Livelaw . IN
Issue No. 3 : In the event of Claimant Nos. 2 to 17 not being
maintain their claim , whether Claimant No. 1 is entitled to claim/pray
for the relief of allotment of shares from the Respondent to Claimant
Nos. 2 to 17 and the payment of USD 1 million dollars to Claimants
No. 4 to 10 ?
Mr. Malhotra , Learned Counsel for the Claimants submitted that :
( a ) Claimant No. 1 is a signatory to the Term Sheet and is the
to be acquired by the Respondent under Clause 1 of the said Term Sheet .
( b ) Claimant No. 1 as an independent legal entity , is well within its rights
initiate proceedings against the Respondent for the breach of contract
leading to closure of Claimant No. 1's business , failure to compensate the
shareholders as promised in the Term Sheet and for misleading it into
closure of its business .
( c ) The act of transfer of Claimant No. 1's business to the Respondent
gratuitous . Therefore , the Respondent having gained the benefit of the
bargain is liable to pay the compensatory reliefs sought by Claimant No. 1
( d ) The Respondent is estranged from raising this objection qua
maintainability at the concluding stage of the Arbitration because it had
specifically stated during the course of arguments on the Section 16
application that Claimant Nos. 2-17 can at best claim through Claimant
No.1 . Attention was drawn to the fact that the said point was given up by
the Respondent by omission in the Sur-Rejoinder Note of Arguments
submitted by Respondent on 20.07.2019 .
(e ) That Claimant Nos. 2-17 had authorized Claimant No.1 to
the transaction . Reliance was placed on the testimony of CW-1 who had
13 .

Page 14:
www. Livelaw . IN
deposed that approvals ( written as well as oral ) in favour of Claimant No. 1
were given by Claimant Nos. 2-17 before the signing of the Term Sheet . It
was also submitted that written approvals were available from Orios
Venture Partners ( Claimant No.2 ) , Tiger Global ( shareholder at the time of
execution of Term Sheet and later transferred its shares to Claimant
No.2 ) . Sol Primero ( Claimant No.3 ) , and the founders
10 ) were given to Claimant No.1 and the approvals from the Angel
Investors of Claimant No. 1 was given by Mr. Zishaan Hayath (
No. 1 1 ) .
In response to the Claimants' submissions , Mr. Salman Khurshid Learned
Senior Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the present arbitration
proceedings are not maintainable at the instance of Claimant No. 1 . It was
submitted that under the Term Sheet , no benefits were to accrue upon
Claimant No. 1 and no relief arising from the Term Sheet had been sought
on behalf of Claimant No.1 in the Statement of Claim . Bacchaj Nahar
Nilima Mandal and Ann. ( 2008 ) 17 SCC 491 was cited to state
can only grant a relief which has been sought by a party and cannot grant
any relief which has not been specifically sought .
Mr. Khurshid also submitted that it was only after the instant objection was
raised as a preliminary objection at the stage of filing of Statement of
Defence , that the Claimants added an additional relief in the Replication
seeking an alternative relief of USD 88,922,768/ in favour of Claimant
No.1 . Therefore , Claimant No.1 cannot maintain the proceedings before
this Arbitral Tribunal .
In order to decide the issue at hand , it is essential to first examine the
Term Sheet and the nature of obligations stated therein . A reading of the
Term Sheet shows that
1 4

Page 15:
www. Livelaw . IN
a. Both Claimant No.1 and the Respondent are signatories' parties to the
Term Sheet .
b. Clause 1 ( Target ) recognizes Claimant No. 1 as the ' target ' .
c. Clause 3 ( Acquisition ) states that :
" For the purposes of acquisition of Assets , the acquire shall pay the
minimum permissible price by law to the Target . "
d. Clause 4 ( Closing ) states that :
" Closing shall be conditional upon fulfillment of the following
conditions :
i. Completion of limited legal and financial diligence of the Target .
ii . Target obtaining all corporate , governmental , management , third
party , exchange control and other regulatory approvals that are
necessary or advisable .
Upon closing :
( A ) Preference shareholders of the target shall be entitled to ... ... in
the Acquirer .
(g ) Equity shareholders of the target shall be entitled to ... in the
Acquirer . "
e. Clause 5 ( Shareholder Rights ) states that
" Liquidity Preference
In the event of any liquidity event ... ... the preference
shareholders of the target will have liquidation preference .
f. Clause 7 ( Definitive Documents ) states that :
" Subject to the conditions set forth in this Term Sheet , the parties
shall mutually agree , execute the following documents and such
other documentation as the parties may deem necessary .
15

Page 16:
www.livelaw . IN
The parties may pursuant to mutual discussions agree upon
execution of one or more agreements to capture the entire
understanding arrived at amongst them . "
g. Clause 8 ( Representation and Warranties ) states that
" The transaction shall be subject to customary representations and
warranties by the Target , Target Shareholders and the Acquirer . "
h. Clause 9 ( Due Diligence ) states that
" The Target shall provide all such information , documents and
material about the business and affairs of the Target as listed in
the Exhibit to this Term Sheet . "
i. Clause 10 ( Non-Compete & Non-solicitation , Non-Dis
Agreement ) states that :
"Founders shall enter into non-disparagement agreement , non-
compete and non-solicitation agreement with the acquirer.
The target shareholders agree not to directly ( or through an
affiliate ) invest in any business that is determined by the Board of
the Acquirer as a competing business .
j. Clause 12 ( Confidentiality ) states that :
" The terms and conditions of this Term Sheet are confidential and
the parties shall not disclose the same to any third party except as
provided below . "
K. Clause 14 ( Announcements ) states that
" All announcements or public statements in relation to the
contemplated transaction shall be made only with prior approval of
the Acquirer and the Target , which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld . "
I. Clause 15 ( Exclusivity ) states that
" The parties hereby further undertake that after signing this Term
Sheet , they shall not for a period of 15 business days .
16

Page 17:
www. Livelaw . IN
approach any person , solicit any offers , engage in any discussions
or enter into any agreements or commitments from any person
with respect to sale or acquisition of any equity instruments of the
Target . "
m. Clause 16 ( Governing Law & Arbitration ) states that :
" Any dispute between the parties arising from or relating to this
Term Sheet which cannot be amicably resolved between the
parties shall be referred to Arbitration in New Delhi in accordance
with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act , 1996 . "
A perusal of the above mentioned clauses of the Term Sheet shows that
Claimant No.1 was a signatory to the Term Sheet and defined as the
Target , whose acquisition was contemplated by the said Term Sheet .
Various clauses of the Term Sheet lay down the obligations of Claimant
No. 1 in its capacity as the Target Party to the Term Sheet . Additionally
other clauses such as clauses 8 and 10 deal with the obligations and/or
entitlements of the Founders and Target Shareholders defined under
clause 2 of the Term Sheet .
In view of the above , it is evident that inclusion of the above terms in a
Term Sheet , to which the Respondent is also admitted a signatory ,
supports the Claimant's case . Had the Claimant not been authorized to
negotiate the Term Sheet on behalf of the Target Shareholders and the
Founders , such clauses could not have been a part of the Term Sheet .
The fact that Respondent is a signatory to the Term Sheet makes it clear
that it had acknowledged and accepted the commitments made to and on
behalf of the Target Shareholders and the Founders through Claimant
No. 1 , at the time of execution of the Term Sheet .
17 .

Page 18:
www. Livelaw . IN
Thus , the Respondent is estranged from contending that Claimant No.1 .
cannot claiming for the reliefs on behalf of other Claimants . This
Tribunal holds that Claimant No. 1 is entitled to claiming for the relief of
allotment of shares from the Respondent to Claimant Nos. 2 to 17 and the
payment of USD 1 Million Dollars to Claimants No. 4 to 10 .
Issue No.4 : Whether the term sheet dated 26.11.2015 is non-binding
as stated in it or whether it is a binding , valid and enforceable
agreement in terms of the acts of the parties as alleged by the
Claimants ?
The nature of the Term Sheet dated 26.11.2015 , is one of the focal points
of the disputes that have arisen in the present matter . While it is the
Claimants' case that the Term Sheet is binding , the Respondent has
vehemently argued that it is Non-Binding and merely exploratory in
nature .
Mr. Malhotra , Learned Counsel for the Claimants argued that the Term
Sheet was a complete contract and contained the Respondent's offer to
acquire the business of Claimant No. 1 , its acceptance and consideration
along with the conditions precedent and subsequent . The conduct of the
parties , subsequent to the execution of the Term Sheet created a binding
contractual obligation on the parties ( both signatories and non-
signatories ) . The parties had by conduct waived the non-binding preamble
of the Term Sheet and created a binding & enforceable contract . There
was consensus ad idem of parties on consumption of the transaction
and the Term Sheet contained all essential terms of acquisition agreed to
between the parties including , identified target , parties to the agreement ,
broad identification of assets to be acquired , rights and obligations of the
shareholder and acquire , consideration , warranties and indemnities , pre
1 8

Page 19:
www. Livelaw . IN
and post-closing conditions and restrictive covenants . The only
contingency was the due diligence ( satisfied in December 2015 ) and the
agreement on the language of the Definitive Agreements ( finalized in
January 2016 and remained unchanged ) which would have led to the
signing of Definitive documents .
Claimants put forth three broad arguments in support of their case . Firstly ,
it was argued that :
a ) Notwithstanding the use of the term ' Non-Binding ' in the recital ,
aspect of the Term Sheet was intended to be binding . Reliance was
placed on clauses 4, 5,7,8. 9. 10, 11 and 14 of
of the same .
b ) Clause 4 shows that upon closing of the Transaction , shareholders of
Claimant No.1 were to acquire pro-rata shareholding of 7.4 in
Respondent . The consensus ad idem on the aforesaid consideration finds
mention across correspondence shared between the parties and also the
Definitive Documents finalized by them . Reliance was placed on Ex. C-30 ,
Ex. C-39 and pages 572-573 , 534-540, 874
1238 of the Respondent's documents and the testimony of CW-10 .
The second argument advanced by the Claimant was that the parties had ,
by conduct , waived the non-binding nature of the Term Sheet . Mr.
Malhotra submitted that the contract must be interpreted in accordance
with the language employed therein coupled with the intent of parties .
Such intent is inter alla reflected from the ' conduct of parties ' as held in
RTS Flexible Systems Ltd. vs. Malkerei Alois Muller Gmbh
( UK Production ) ( 2013 ) 3 All ER 1 . Reliance was also placed on Rev
Independent LLC vs. Anotech International ( Case No. 2013 Folio 1137 )
and Videocon Telecommunication Ltd. vs. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
( TDSAT ) ( Petition No. 10 of 2013 ) .
19 .

Page 20:
www.livelaw . IN
It was further argued that it is settled law that contemporaneous
correspondence can be read to deduce the intent and consensus ad item
between parties . A perusal of the correspondence exchanged between
parties makes it clear that a binding contract was created at the behest of
the Respondent . Attention was drawn to the Definitive Documents and it
was stated that it showed ' all material terms ' had been agreed to , by all
parties . Following instances were pointed out to show that the obligations
of the Term Sheet were binding and accepted by the Respondent .
a ) Due diligence process was completed by December 14 , 2015 and
Respondent was satisfied with the outcome thereof . Reliance was placed
on Respondent's email ( Due Dilgence Confirmation email ) dated
14.12.2015 ( Ex. C.41 ) which records that Respondent had gone
the Due Diligence Documents shared with it , and did not have any further
requisitions .
b ) Public announcement by SoftBank ( Respondent's Shareholder ) on
10.02.2016 ( Mark-A ) declared 'Acquisition of Zo Rooms '
the 9 month period ending December 2015 .
c ) Clause 4.3 of the Framework Agreement clarified that significant
obligations under the Term Sheet and Definitive Documents had been
performed by the Claimants and the insertion of the clause was accepted
by both parties .
d ) Minutes of Meeting dated 22.02.2016 ( Ex. C.57 ) recorded
assurance that " the Company completely endorses the deal and is
extremely unhappy at the stand that VN is taking " . Reliance was also
placed on the fact that during his cross-examination , Mr. Abhishek Gupta
( RW-1 ) stated that the contents of the said email accurately described the
discussions during meeting dated 22.02.2016 .
In view of the above , it was submitted that conduct of parties read with the
correspondence on record created valid , binding and enforceable
contractual obligations on the parties . Signature of parties to a written
20

Page 21:
www. Livelaw . IN
contract is not a pre-condition to the existence of contractual relations as a
contract can equally be accepted by conduct Respondent had failed to
explain its conduct which proves that it consented to and instructed the
Claimants to consummate the Transaction .
The third argument advanced by the Claimants in support of their case
was that there was consensus and idern and consumption of transaction
by conduct . It was submitted that as a part of acquisition by the
Respondent , Claimants effectuated transfer of employees , hotel properties
under the name ' Zo Rooms ' , consumer migration from Online Travel
Agent (OTA ) Platforms , 1505 future bookings w.e.f.31
data and termination of vendor agreements . Respondent has failed to
provide any justification in response to its conduct .
Ex. C-48 ( Colly ) was relied upon to state that vice email dated 04
parties had finalized the Definitive Documents ( Ex. C-27 to C-35 ) and
upon finalization , Claimant No.1 on instructions of the Respondent
procured stamp papers . It was further submitted that the only obligation
which remained to be performed was for the Respondent to pay the
agreed consideration for the benefits received . In support of their
submissions , Claimants relied upon B.L. Sreedhar and Ors. Vs
Munnireddy ( Dead ) and Ors. ( 2003 ) 2 SCC 355 )
( Dead ) through LRS vs. T. Aswatha Narayana ( Dead )
1968 SC 1028 ) etc.
Mr. Salman Khurshid , Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent refuted
the Claimants' arguments and submitted that :
a . The Term Sheet does not constitute a binding agreement for the proposed
transaction .
21

Page 22:
www. Livelaw . IN
b. There is no Oral Agreement between the Parties and parties have clearly
expressed their intention to be bound by the Definitive Agreements in
writing .
c. Term Sheet is an agreement to enter into an agreement and is not
recognized in law .
d. Definitive Documents were never agreed upon or executed or signed .
In support of the said arguments , reliance was placed on the preamble of
the Term Sheet to state that the common intention of the parties was to
' not ' create any binding obligation under the Term Sheet and the
signatories clearly specified that they will only create binding contractual
obligations upon execution of Definitive Agreements . Reliance was placed
on Polymat India P. Ltd vs. National Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors.
Comp Cas 663 ) and Kamala Devi vs. Takhatmal and Ors. (
859 ) to state that the intention of the parties must be gathered from words
of the contract and the same is evident from the words of the preamble to
the Term Sheet . It was further submitted that when the meaning of the
words is clear and does not admit to any divergentimultible interpretation .
then the language must be taken as conclusive of the parties' intention
and the Arbitral Tribunal ought not to look into extrinsic evidence .
It was argued that it is not the Claimant's case that they were under any
mistaken impression that the Term Sheet was a final and binding contract
and parties well understood that they were only at the stage of initial
phases of discussion and that the Term Sheet was intended to be a non-
binding document . Respondent's Board Resolution dated 25.11.2015 was
cited to state that authorization was provided for the limited purpose and
limited extent of authorizing Mr. Ritesh Aganwal ( RW-3 ) and Mr
Gupta ( RW-1 ) to execute a non-binding Term Sheet to explore possible
business opportunity of acquiring some assets of Claimant No. 1 . Board of
the Respondent had not provided consent to the consumption of
22

Page 23:
www. Livelaw . IN
transaction and it was understood that the Term Sheet was signed only for
the purpose of further discussions . Moreover , the Term Sheet was
terminated wide correspondence dated 17.09.2016 and 19.09.2016 .
Claimants' argument regarding Oral Agreement between the parties was
refuted as under :
i . There is no pleading of oral agreement in the Statement of Claim .
ii . No plea of Oral agreement can be set up once parties agreed in the Term
Sheet that they will be bound only by the Definitive Agreements - if and
when they are executed .
iii . There is no plea of Oral Agreement .
It was further submitted that the Term Sheet being an agreement to enter
into an agreement , was not recognized under law . Reliance was placed on
Von Hatzfield-Wildenburg vs. Alexander ( ( 1912 ) 1 (H
the same . If the parties are at the material terms of the contract
and agree to be bound only by the execution of a definitive document , no
rights and obligations could arise till such time as the definitive document
is executed . Reliance was placed on Rohit A. Kapadia & Ann. vs.
Modi and Dresser Rand S.A. vs. Bindal Agro Chem Ltd.
SCC 751 ) .
The proposed terms remained inconclusive and uncertain . Therefore , the
Term Sheet is void in view of Section 29 of the Contract Act . It was stated
that the terms were uncertain in respect of assets to be acquired ,
consideration etc . The closing of the transaction was predicated on the
completion of various conditions , some of which have been mentioned in
Clause 4 , Annexure I and Annexure II of the Term Sheet . However , the
clause 4 also states that closing was also based on completion of " any
other condition in the Definitive Agreements ' . Presence of this condition
makes the Term Sheet further ambiguous , in as much as at the time of
23

Page 24:
www. Livelaw . IN
execution of the same , the parties were not even aware of what conditions
would be required to be fulfilled for a binding agreement to be effectuated
between the parties .
Regarding Claimants' argument that the non-binding nature of the Term
Sheet was waived by the parties , it was submitted that Claimants have not
pleaded when , by which express conduct the non-binding nature was
waived by the parties converting the Term Sheet into a binding contract .
Respondent differentiated Reveille Independent LLC vs. Anotech
International ( UK ) Ltd. ( Case No. 2013 Follo. 137 ) and RTS
Systems Ltd.vs . Molkerei Aldis Muller Gmbh & Co.
(2010 3 All ER 1 ) , Videocon Telecommunication Ltd. vs. Bharat San
Nigam Ltd . ( TOSAT ) cited by the Claimant to state that the
applicable to the facts of the present case .
Mr. Malhotra submitted in rejoinder that the Respondent had taken a
contradictory stand by stating on one hand that it was the clear intent of
the parties that the Term Sheet was non-binding and arguing on the other
hand that Term Sheet was vague and ambiguous .
Regarding Respondent's argument that the Term Sheet was vague and
ambiguous , it was submitted by the Claimants that assuming without
admitting that the case was as alleged by the Respondent , then it is
settled law that the Term Sheet must be interpreted in the light of conduct
of parties as held in Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited
& Ors. Vs. GMR Vernagiri Power Generation Ltd. and Ann. (
716 ) .
Regarding the Respondent's contention that email dated 14.12.2015 ( Ex.
C41 ) ( Due Diligence Confirmation Email ) cannot be construed as
24

Page 25:
www. Livelaw . IN
evidence of completion of Due Deligence , Claimants submitted that
Respondent had failed to show from the documents on record of the
Tribunal , whether any requisitions were raised by the Respondent's
counsel after 14.12.2015 till 31.03.2016 ( the date when
Documents were to be executed ) . It was further submitted that in view of
the Respondent's failure to show the requisite documents , its contention is
baseless and deserves to be rejected . It was further submitted that the
fallacy in the Respondent's case is evident from the testimony of Mr.
Abhishek Gupta ( RW-1 ) when , in his answers to questions regarding proof
of intimation of pending due diligence between 14.2.2015 and
31.03.2016 , relied upon emails dated December 2.3 , 2016 which were
much prior to the period specified above .
Regarding the aspects of ' oral agreement between parties ' and ' waiver by
conduct , the Claimants submitted that they had not pleaded that parties
had waived the requirement of executing the Definitive Documents or that
any oral agreement had been entered into by the parties . It was the
Claimants' case that parties by conduct had created a binding contract
which was also performed by the Claimant . The judgment in Dresser Rand
( supra ) was relied upon to state that the Respondent's reliance on the said
judgment is misplaced in so far as it states that it is open for the courts to
hold that parties are bound by the document , and the courts will , in
particular be inclined to do so where the parties have acted on the
document for a long period of time or have expended considerable sums
of money in reliance on it .
In order to ascertain the true intent of the parties , it is imperative to read
the complete document as a whole . It would not be in the interest of
justice if conclusions are drawn merely by reading the preamble and
25

Page 26:
www. Livelaw . IN
ignoring the clauses which form the main subject matter of the Term
Sheet .
Clause 4 ( Closing ) states that :
The Closing shall be conditional upon fulfillment of the following
conditions :
i. Completion of limited legal and financial diligence of the Target .
ii . Target obtaining all corporate , governmental , management , third party
exchange control and the regulatory approvals that are necessary or
advisable .
iii . Conditions identified under Annexure -l ; and
iv. Any other conditions in the Definitive Agreements
Conditions laid in Annexure-l ( Closing Obligations ) are as follows :
1 . Withdrawal of all cases by the Target against the Acquirer , including but
not limited to CS (OS ) No. 2093/2015 , contemporaneously and
simultaneously with the Acquirer withdrawing its cases against the Target ,
including but not limited to CS (OS ) 1058/2015 , pursuant to a certain
Settlement and Release Agreement executed in a mutually acceptable
form and manner .
2 . Transfer consumer traffic by redirecting all calls , website , phone based
application and any other consumer traffic generating system to the
respective channels of the Acquirer , reasonably costs of which shall be
borne by the Acquirer .
3 . Transfer assets reasonable costs of which shall be borne by the Acquirer.
4 . Send an appropriate written , mutually agreed communication to all
stakeholders of the Target , including but not limited to the property
owners , customers and the employees intimating about the closure of
operations of the Target and the Acquisition by the Acquirer .
5 . Hand over to the acquire all data base and records related to customers ,
hotel owners including contracts pertaining to live property and property
26

Page 27:
www. Livelaw . IN
yet to go live along with the relationship contacts , subject to confidentiality
norms and privacy related concerns .
6 . Execute all documents ( to the satisfaction of Acquirer ) to ensure that
employeeloption holder liabilities are satisfied after Closing . I
Clause 7 deals with Definitive Documents and states that :
" Subject to the conditions set forth in this Term Sheet , the
parties shall mutually agree , execute the following documents
and such other documentation as the parties may deem
necessary ( hereinafter referred to as the Definitive
Agreements ) :
a ) Share . Subscription . Agreement , Merger Framework
Agreement ( Acquirer ) ;
b ) Shareholders Agreement ( Acquirer ) ;
c ) AssetBusiness Transfer Agreement ;
d ) Non-Compete , Non-Solicitation Agreement with the
Founders ; and
e ) Settlement and Release Agreement executed between
Acquirer and Target "
Clause 9 deals with Due Diligence and states that
" Following execution of this Term Sheet , the Acquirer shall
have the opportunity to conduct a diligence on the Target .
The Target shall provide all such information , documents and
material about the business and affairs of the Target as listed
in the Exhibit to this Term Sheet . "
A reading of Clause 4 and Annexure - I shows that completion of the due
diligence process , obtaining approvals and fulfillment of conditions under
Annexure-I are requirements that ought to be fulfilled in order to close the
transaction . In other words , closing of the transaction ( i.e. Acquisition of
27 .

Page 28:
www. Livelaw . IN
Claimant No. 1 by the Respondent ) is the natural and only consequence of
compliance of these conditions .
Clauses 4 ( iii ) and 4 div ) of the Term Sheet show that fulfilment of
conditions stated in Annexure - are essential and conditions stated under
Definitive Agreements have to be fulfilled in addition to the conditions laid
down in clauses 4 ( i ) to 4 (iii ) .
A careful examination of Annexure - I , shows that said conditions demand
specific actions to be taken by the parties such as withdrawing cases
( instituted and pending ) against each other , transfer of consumer traffic &
assets by Claimant No.1 to the Respondent , handing over database &
records related to customers and hotel properties by Claimant No. 1 to the
Respondent etc.
Therefore , it is evident that the Term Sheet demanded Claimant No.1 to
fulfill many conditions as closing obligations and it is not the case that
Claimant No. 1 was to fulfill only the conditions mentioned in the Definitive
Documents to act towards Closing the Transaction . Clause 4 read with
Annexure-I shows that the Term Sheet was not a mere exploratory
document . It is duly executed by Claimant No. 1 and the Respondent and
binds Claimant No. 1 to fulfill several obligations , apart from those listed in
the Definitive Documents . Therefore , a complete reading of the Term
Sheet does not support the stand taken by the Respondent .
Clause 7 stipulates that the execution of Definitive Documents was
subject to the conditions set forth in the Term Sheet . ' This encompasses
conditions mentioned in clause 4 and buttresses the point that execution
of Definitive Documents was not independent of the Term Sheet .
28

Page 29:
www. Livelaw . IN
Clause 9 is not a mandatory clause in view of the Preamble of the Term
Sheet . However , it was only pursuant to Clause 9 and the execution of the
Term Sheet that the right to conduct a diligence of Claimant No. 1 accrued
upon the Respondent . Had the Term Sheet been Non-Binding and
obligations of the parties were meant to materialize wholly and solely upon
the execution of Definitive Documents , the Respondent could never have
been entitled to conduct a Dilgence of Claimant No.1 in the absence of
any Definitive Documents to that effect . It can be safely said that at the
very least , it was only pursuant to the Term Sheet , that the Respondent
could conduct the Due Diligence and became privy to sensitive
commercial information that would not have been shared by Claimant
No.1 in ordinary course of business with a competitor . A perusal of the
Limited Diligence Checklist annexed with the Term Sheet shows that it
sought detailed information about Corporate Documents , Share &
Shareholder Information , Financial Diligence , Intellectual Property Rights ,
Assets , Human Resource , Litigation and Information Technology . Ex. C-
40 is the Preliminary Requisition List shared by Respondent No.1
prepared pursuant to the documents received from Claimant No.1 by the
Respondent in response to the Limited Dilience Checklist .
The Term Sheet did contain a basic framework regarding acquisition ,
subject to which the Definitive Documents were to be executed . Therefore ,
even if it is assumed that at the time of execution of the Term Sheet the
parties had intended that the Term Sheet be Non-Binding and exploratory ,
by conduct , parties waived the non-binding preamble of the Term Sheet
and created a binding & enforceable contract .
In the considered opinion of this Tribunal , a plain reading of the Term
Sheet as a whole does not support the case set-up by the Respondent .
The Term Sheet is a binding document . Without expressing any opinion
29

Page 30:
www.livelaw . In
on the consequences of the acts listed below ( which is the subject matter
of other issues ) , it is observed that the Claimant did take various steps in
order to fulfil the obligations listed in Annexure - of the Term Sheet such
as :
1 . Facilitating transfer of Claimant No. 1's employees ( Ex. C.19
upon )
2 . Facilitating transfer of properties in Claimant No.1's network to
Respondent's Network . ( Ex.C-21 relied upon )
3 . Facilitating the process of Consumer Migration ( Ex. C.1 ( Colly )
upon )
4 . Facilitating the process of transferring of future bookings w.e.f. 31
5 . Providing consumer data of Claimant No.1 to the Respondent ( Ex.
relied upon )
Had the Term Sheet been non-binding and meaningless , there was no
reason for the Respondent to have entertained or shown interest in any
communication in respect of transfer of employees' properties ) consumer
migration etc.
Hence , this Tribunal holds that the parties were acting upon the Term
Sheet and the Term Sheet is a binding document .
Issue No.5 . Whether there was consensus ad idem between the
parties on the Draft Definitive Agreements stipulated under clause 7
of the Term Sheet dated 26.11.20157
Mr. Abhishek Malhotra , Learned Counsel for the Claimants' submitted that
consensus ad idem had been achieved in respect of the Definitive
Documents . It was submitted that :
( a ) It was on the instructions of the Respondent and after consensus ad idem
had been achieved between the parties that the Claimants bought the
Stamp papers for execution of the Definitive Documents . Reliance was
30

Page 31:
www. Livelaw . IN
placed on emails dated 31.03.2016 ( Ex. C.48 Colly ) sent
( counsel of the Respondent ) and email by Mr. Vinay Thakur ( one
officials of the Respondent ) giving the details of the stamp papers to be
bought and instructions that they must be bought on the same day .
( b ) The only reason for non-execution of the Definitive Documents was due to
the unsupportive attitude and stand taken by Venture Nursery ( one of the
shareholders of the Respondent ) . Reliance was placed on the testimony
of Claimants witnesses Mr. Abhishek Bhutra ( CW-1 ) and Mr
Chauhan ( CW-9 ) along with Exhibit C-56 ( email dated 26.
Mr. Gautam Mayo of Sequoia Capital - a shareholder of Respondent
company to Claimant No. 1's shareholder ) in support of the submission .
( c ) Mr. Gautam Mago would not have given the assurance that parties '
nearly there's save for the ' unreasonable demands ' of Venture Nursery if
the Respondent had any misgivings or concerns regarding the
Transaction , particularly the ones sought to be raised belatedly in these
proceedings .
( d ) In order to resolve the Venture Nursery issue , representatives of
Respondent and Claimant No. 1 met on 22.02.2016 where the Respond
agreed to close the said issue by giving an exit to Venture Nursery and
signing Framework Agreement at the earliest . Reliance was placed on Ex.
C-57 ( email dated 03.03.2016 ) to state that the discussions between the
parties during the said meeting were recorded in Ex. C.57 and the same
was confirmed by Mr. Abhishek Gupta ( RW-1 ) in his testimony .
parties had consensus add idem on the Definitive Documents .
(e ) Reliance was placed on email dated 02.03.2016 ( Ex. C
the said email exchanged between counsels for Respondent and Claimant
No.1 demonstrates that both Respondent and Claimant had committed to
conclude the envisaged transaction as per the terms agreed to and
reflected in the finalized documents previously circulated .
3 1 .

Page 32:
www. Livelaw . IN
( A short extension of time was accorded to the Respondent to allow it to
negotiate with its minority shareholder and resolve the issue . In order to
accommodate the same , amended Framework Agreement to capture the
above understanding was shared with the Respondent .
( 9 ) The final version of the amended Framework Agreement was shared by
the Claimant on 02.03.2016 and the Respondent has not placed any
further communication to rebut this .
It was also argued that the agreement between parties on all the definitive
agreements is evident from emails dated 04.08.2016 sent by Mr. Neeraj
Shrimali from Avenius Capital ( Claimant No.1's Tax Advisor ) to the
Respondent's counsel . While the email was shared at the time when the
parties were discussing alternative structure for the lapse of the
transaction in view of the lapse of timeline of 31" march 2016 , Ex. C-
( colly ) clearly shows that all Definitive Documents were ' drafts in agreed
form' prior to March 31 , 2016 .
Mr. V. Srinivasa Raghavan , Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
Respondent argued that the parties had no intention to be bound in the
absence of finalization of Definitive Documents and it is not the Claimant's
case that there is waiver of this requirement . Reliance was placed on the
testimony of CW-1 and CW-7 in support of the same . It was further
submitted that the Claimants witnesses admitted that signing would be
essential to show confirmation of acceptance of the terms of Definitive
Agreements and it was not open to the Claimants to assert that Definitive
Documents were entered into orally or by exchange of correspondence
and drafts .
It was submitted that a new understanding was recorded wide email dated
17.09.2016 . Additional data and documents were given to process the
documents for a demerger instead of business transfer . It was submitted
32

Page 33:
www. Livelaw . IN
that the Claimant's stand was contradictory in so far as on one hand it
asserted consensus of Definitive Documents , while on the other Claimant
referred to the new understanding in the Statement of Claim . It was
further argued that the earlier drafts of Definitive Documents were no
longer relevant as new documents were required to be agreed in terms of
the new understanding . Therefore , the argument that consensus was
arrived at between the parties by March 2016 cannot be believed or given
credence . Even if there was a consensus between the parties on the
drafts of Definitive Agreements , as alleged , then the claimants have by
their conduct and admission given up the transaction as contemplated
under such Draft Definitive Agreements .
Attention was drawn to the fact that the drafts placed on record by the
Claimant showed that Zostel Hostels business was also to be acquired .
However , the claimants relied on email dated 10.02.2016 ( Ex. C-66
state that Zostel Hostels business was not to be transferred . This
contradiction in itself shows that the drafts could not have been final .
Further , emails dated 08.04.2016 and 10.04.2016 ( Ex. C
upon to show that there was no consensus between the parties and that
the Claimant wanted to carry out changes in the drafts . Attention was
drawn to the fact that many drafts were exchanged even in September
2016 and the consideration was left blank deliberately since there was no
consensus .
It was also submitted that :
( a ) There were contradictions in the Claimant's pleadings in so far as the
period for finalization of Definitive Agreements was concerned . Reliance
was placed on Para 5.7.1, 5.9.4 and 5.
( b ) Para 5.20.2 of the Statement of Claim contained an assertion by
Claimants that a new understanding had been recorded in email dated
33 .

Page 34:
www.livelaw . In
17.09.2016 addressed by Claimant No. 1 to Respondent and consented to
by the Respondent in its response dated 19.09.2016 .
( c ) Para 5.20.3 of the Statement of Claim stated that certain additional
and documents were given to process the documents for a demerger
instead of a business transfer . Therefore , the so-called Definitive
Documents in which there was a so-called consensus by March 2016
were no longer relevant and there had to be other documentation agreed
upon pursuant to a new understanding of a merger .
( d ) The assertion that there was a ' new understanding ' in September 2016
which required new documentation to be agreed upon shows that there
was no finally or consensus whatsoever about the so-called definitive
agreements placed on record by the Claimants .
( e ) Therefore , even if there was a consensus on the drafts of the Definitive
Agreements , then the Claimants have by their own conduct and
admissions given up the transaction as contemplated under the draft
Definitive Agreements .
( A ) Definitive Documents relied upon by the Claimants show that there were
10 agreements to which almost 33 parties were signatories to at least 1 of
the said agreements including but not limited to all shareholders of
Claimant No.1 , shareholders of Respondent and key employees of
Claimant No.1 .
( g ) Therefore , Claimant's allegation of consensus between Claimant No. 1 and
Respondent is of no avail as the said agreements had to be agreed upon
and signed by several parties . There is no averment in the Statement of
Claim that there was any agreement and for consensus among all of the
33 parties .
( h ) Admittedly , it is not the Claimant's case that after September 2016 ,
Definitive Agreements had been drawn up and agreed pertaining to the
" new understanding . '
34

Page 35:
www. Livelaw . IN
( i ) The version of Definitive Agreements stated in the Statement of Claim had
not been identified or produced with the Statement of Claim .
Claimants were not certain of the documents as to which version of
documents could be termed as the ones on which alleged consensus had
been achieved .
( K ) According to the Claimants themselves , one of the signatories ( Venture
Nursery ) had objections to the documents . Therefore , it is
incomprehensive how it can be claimed that the documents had been
agreed upon .
( I ) In view of the objections raised by Venture Nursery , and Claimant's own
statement that the issue could not be resolved until July-August 2016 , it
becomes evident that there could not have been consensus on the so-
called drafts of Definitive Documents by March , 2016 .
In addition to the above mentioned submissions , a table containing
documentslements relevant for determining the present issue of consensus
ad idem on the Definitive Documents was placed on record .
Contradictions in the testimonies of the Claimant's witnesses were also
highlighted to state that even the evidence led by the claimants would
clearly show that the Definitive Agreements were not finalized between the
parties who were supposed to sign them .
While addressing arguments in rejoinder , Mr. Malhotra submitted that :
( a ) The approval of the following shareholders of the Respondent was already
available on record of the Tribunal :
i. SoftBank Group International Ltd. ( Retied on Ex. C.55 Colly
ii . Sequoia Capital Investments India Investments IV ( Relief on Ex. C-56 )
iii . Mr. Ritesh Agarwal ( Ex. C.38 ( Colly
iv. Remaining Shareholders except Venture Nursery ( Ex. C-57 and
testimonies of CW-1 and CW-9 relied upon )
35

Page 36:
www. Livelaw . In
( b ) Revised Framework Agreement was sent in accordance with parties
discussions during meeting dated 22.02.2016 . However , once parties had
given an exit to Venture Nursery , revised version became unnecessary
and Definitive Documents could have been executed as they were .
( c ) The Respondent , while setting out the table of events_documents failed to
explain the gap in communication between 10.04.2016 and 27.07.2016
while they were negotiating on daily basis . This gap is explained by the
WhatsApp conversation between Mr. Dharamveer Chauhan and Mr.
Ritesh Agarwal ( Ex. C.53 ( Colly ) ) which makes
waiting only for the exit of Venture Nursery . After the exit of Venture
Nursery , the parties were only to complete the formality of executing the
documents .
( d ) Regarding Respondent's averment that Claimants were aware of the
Venture Nursery issue since January 2016 and hence there could have
been no consensus , it was submitted that the said contention is patiently
false . Reliance was placed on emails dated 04.1.2015 and 05.1.
( Ex. C-10 Colly ) exchanged between Mr.Maninder Gulati of the
Respondent and Mr. Abhishek Bhutra ( CW-1 ) wherein CW
asked for an assurance that the transaction would not be sabotaged at the
last minute under the guise of lack of approvals . The Board Resolution
dated 25.11.2015 was provided by the Respondent to assign the
Claimants' concerns that the Board of the Respondent , did , in fact
approve the transaction .
(e ) Regarding change in the nature of transaction from Slump Sale to Court
approved demerger , it was submitted that after the exit of Venture
Nursery , parties opted for an alternative business structure in the form of a
Court approved demerger process , since the earlier structure was no
longer viable ( Reliance placed on testimony of CW-10 ) .
36

Page 37:
www. Livelaw . IN
( A Since all aspects under the Definitive Agreements had been agreed upon ,
and Claimant had completed their obligations , they agreed to adopt a
court demerger process on the advise of the Respondent's advisers .
(g ) Only the Framework and Shareholder Agreement were to be modified to
restate the revised shareholders rights after the exit of Venture Nursery .
Even in the alternate structure , Definitive Documents were to be modified
to incorporate changes in structure from slump sale to demerger .
Parties have been heard . It is settled law that consensus ad idem means
agreement between parties over the same thing in the same sense . In
Mayawanti vs. Kaushalya Devi ( 1990 )3SCC1 it has
"19 . The specific performance of a contract is the actual
execution of the contract according to its stipulations and
terms , and the courts direct the party in default to do the
very thing which he contracted to do . The stipulations and
terms of the contract have , therefore , to be certain and the
parties must have been consensus at idem . The burden of
showing the stipulations and terms of the contract and that
the minds were ad idem is , of course , on the plaintiff . If the
stipulations and terms are uncertain , and the parties are
not ad idem , there can be no specific performance , for
there was no contract at all . Where there are negotiations ,
the court has to determine at what point , if at all , the
parties have reached agreement . Negotiations thereafter
would also be material if the agreement is rescinded . '
In view of Clause 7 of the Term Sheet , the Definitive Documents were to
be executed subject to the conditions set forth in the Term Sheet .
Therefore , one of the primary aspects on which the parties were ad idern
was the acquisition of identified assets of Claimant No.1 by the
Respondent . This intention is further buttressed by the contents of Ex. C-
37 .

Page 38:
www. Livelaw . IN
10 Colly wherein wide email dated 04.11.2015 Mr. Abhishek Bh
1 ) categorically asked Mr. Maninder Gulati of the Respondent that
" While we are working towards ironing out the term sheet , it
is imperative that we obtain from OYO copies of Board
Resolution , shareholders resolution and existing investors
approval for the proposed transaction .
This is necessary to ensure that the transaction is not
sabotaged at the last minute in the guise of internal
approvals not being available . "
In response to the Claimant's concern , Mr. Maninder Gulati replied that
Hi Abhishek , sabotage is totally not the intention but we
can understand your concern . We are happy to provide
Board approval when we are near Tina O ... the term sheet .
We are also talking to our tax guys to understand how best
to structure this transaction . "
The Board Resolution dated 25.11.2015 ought to be read in the context of
the above mentioned conversation and it is clear that at the very least ,
parties were an idern in respect of acquisition of identified assets of
Claimant No. 1 by the Respondent .
Admittedly , Due Diligence was conducted in December 2015 . Parties
began exchanging drafts of various Definitive Agreements in the month of
December 2015 , and by January 2016 several revised drafts were shared
based on comments of the parties . In view of the arguments advanced by
both parties , it is clear that upto nearly end of January 2016 , the drafts
were being commented upon and revisions were being made accordingly
However , it was on January 26 , 2016 that one of the partners of Sequoia
38 .

Page 39:
www. Livelaw . IN
Capital ( Respondent's Shareholder and Investor ) addressed an email to
Claimant No. 1's shareholder ( Ex. C-56 ) stating that :
" Oyo team has been working relentlessly to finalise the
docs . We are nearly there but a minority investor has held
up the process by asking for new and unreasonable rights in
the SHA and generally being unsupportive .
Just wanted to let you know that we are trying to resolve
asap while minimizing any long term risk/issues . '
Several drafts were shared thereafter . Meetings took place between the
parties regarding the issues raised by Venture Nursery and its objections
in respect of the deal . Ex. C-57 captures the position existing as on
22.03.2016 and highlights that :
a . Venture Nursery was not supporting the deal and has written to the Board
of Directors stating this .
b.OYO was reluctant to do anything which can put the intended financing at
risk .
c.OYO's team stated that going forward they would attempt to do a quick pro
quo with Venture Nursery . The terms being that if existing or new OYO
investors are ready to give VN exit , the VN would have to agree to stop
being signatories to future SHAs and amendments thereto . Their idea is to
bring out the irrationality at Venture Nursery's end by offering them a deal
which would be fair .
d. It was decided by all parties that revised Framework agreement would be
signed at the earliest .
Though Ex. C-57 has been denied by the Respondent being an internal
document of the Claimant , RW-1 ( Mr. Abhishek Gupta )
email in his cross examination and stated that some items discussed in
39 .
exp .

Page 40:
www. Livelaw . IN
the meeting were documented in Ex. C.57 . In view of RW-1's testimony
Respondent's objection que Ex. C-57 is not sustainable .
Ex. C-53 ( Colly ) is a WhatsApp communication between Mr. Dhar
Chauhan and Mr. Ritesh Agarwal and shows that Claimants were
regularly seeking updates on the Venture Nursery Issue . The said
communication clearly shows that the parties were waiting for the exit of
Venture Nursery to complete the transaction .
Ex. C48 (Colly ) shows that it was on the instructions of the Respondent
that the Claimants bought the Stamp papers . This leads to a natural
conclusion that Respondent was inclined to close the transaction .
Documents placed on the record show that the parties were inclined to
close the deal . It is evident that the revision of Definitive Documents and
their finalization was significantly affected by the events pertaining to the
issues raised by Venture Nursery . Objections raised by Venture Nursery
disturbed the normal course of finalization of the Definitive Documents . No
documents have been placed on record , which suggest a contrary view .
It was essential that Definitive Agreements be amended to include the
changes necessitated in view of the objections raised by Venture Nursery .
However , such documents never came to be finalized by the parties .
Therefore , in view of the documents placed on record and the pending
issue with Venture Nursery that remained to be resolved by the
Respondent , this Tribunal holds that there could not have been complete
consensus at idem on the Draft Definitive Agreements .
Issue No.6 : Whether as asserted by the Claimants they were ready
and willing to perform their obligations under the Term Sheet dated
26.11.2015 and to execute the draft definitive agreements
contemplated under the Term Sheet ?
40

Page 41:
www. Livelaw . IN
Mr. Malhotra , Learned Counsel for the Claimants submitted that the
Claimants were always ready and willing to perform their obligations under
the Term Sheet and execute the draft definitive agreements contemplated
under the Term Sheet .
In support of their contentions , Mr. Malhotra submitted that
a ) Claimants performed all closing obligations under the Term Sheet
independent of contemporaneous simultaneous action performance by the
Respondent .
b ) The obligations that remained unfulfilled ( i.e. Execution of Finalized
Definitive Documents and Withdrawal of pending litigation by both parties )
were solely on account of Respondent's non-performance of obligations
pursuant to the Term Sheet , despite claimants' willingness and readiness
to perform the same . Reliance was placed on upon paragraphs 5.16. 5.18
5.19 , 5.20.5.21.2 of the Statement of Claim and
demonstrate the readiness and willingness of the Claimant to perform .
c ) It was after the transfer of Claimants' hotel business and employees to the
Respondent that the Claimants were informed about the issues raised by
Venture Nursery ( Respondent's Minority Shareholder ) .
d ) Claimant relied upon its emails dated 08.04.2016 and 10.04.
50 Colly ) addressed by Claimant No. 8 to the Respondent asking the
exact dates of execution of the final definitive Documents as several
timelines had slipped and whether the Framework Agreement would be
signed within 3 days . Attention was also drawn to Respondent's reply
dated 09.04.2016 informing the Claimants that ' several discussions were
underway with the early investors and some concrete actions could be
taken by the end of the month ' .
Reliance was placed on Ramesh Chandra Chandiok vs. Chunilal
Sabhanwal AIR 1971 SC 1238 to state that the question of readiness and
41 .
6tho

Page 42:
www. Livelaw . IN
willingness is one of construction of facts , details or particulars of a case
from which the readiness and willingness can be inferred . Testimony of
Claimant's witnesses was relied upon to state that while the Claimant was
ready and willing to close the transaction , it was the Respondent who was
not willing to perform its obligations , despite having gained the benefit of
the bargain .
The following instances were highlighted in support of the contention that
the Claimants were ready and willing to perform their obligations :
a ) Claimants purchased Stamp papers at the instructions of the Respondent
( Retied on Ex. C42 Colly and Ex. C48 Colly )
b ) Whatsapp conversation between Mr. Dharamveer Chauhan ( Respondent
No.5 ) and Mr. Ritesh Agarwal ( RW.3 ) where
occasions sought response from the Respondent on the status of
transaction after the exit of Venture Nursery ( Relief on Ex.C-53 )
c ) Testimonies of Claimant's witness Mr. Tarun Tiwari ( CW
that while Claimants were willing to transfer whatever the Respondent
asked them to , for many of the items , they received ' no instruction ' .
d ) Special Purpose Vehicle called " Woodlight Interiors " in February - April
2017 was created as required under alternative structure of court
approved demerger . ( Relief on CW-1 and CW-10 )
e ) Efforts were made towards amicably resolving the pending litigations
between parties which is a Closing Obligation under the Term Sheet .
( Order dated 12.01.2016 passed in CS ( OS ) 1058/2015 recording
Respondent and Claimant No. 1 had compromised the matter in principal
and the terms of the same were being finalized . Compromise continued till
September 2017 as evident from order dated 20.09.2017 ) However ,
Claimants failed to withdraw the pending litigation owing to the
Respondent's failure to adhere to any of its obligations in terms of
payment of consideration in lieu of transfer of Claimants' business .
42

Page 43:
www. Livelaw . IN
f ) Claimants attempted to close the transaction even in October 2017 i.e.
after the transfer of its hotel room business in January 2016 . ( Relief on
ex. C-60 ) .
All obligations under the Term Sheet were performed except withdrawal of
litigation and execution of the finalized Definitive Documents which
remained unfulfilled on account of Respondent's lack of readiness and
willingness to perform its obligations .
Mr. Raghavan , Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent reiterated the
submissions made earlier and submitted that the Claimants have failed to
prove unconditional readiness and willingness at all times to fulfill their
obligations under the Term Sheet and for the Definitive Agreements .
It was submitted that :
( a ) Claimants have not pleaded that they were ready and willing to perform
the obligations under the Term Sheet .
( b ) Claimant No. 1 has failed to transfer its business , key employees , I
the Respondent
( c ) Claimants did not comply with the non-compete obligations , they continue
to operate the business .
( d ) In September 2016 , Claimants by their own conduct gave up the
transaction contemplated in the Term Sheet and the Draft Definitive
Agreements . Parties embarked upon fresh negotiations for a
mergerldemer structure . Therefore , Claimants have failed to prove
that :
i . They performed all their obligations under the Term Sheet and alleged
Draft Definitive Agreements .
ii . They were ready and willing to perform these obligations at all material
times .
Regarding Respondent's averment that the claimants had never pleaded
that they were ever ready and willing to perform the obligations , Mr.
43 .

Page 44:
www. Livelaw . IN
Malhotra submitted that the same was a glaring instance of falsifying facts
and reiterated the relevant paras from the Statement of Claim pertaining to
readiness and willingness . Further , it was submitted that the scope of the
present proceedings and dispute did not include claims under Definitive
Documents . Therefore , Respondent's reliance on Definitive Documents to
show non-performance is a merit less attempt to mislead this Tribunal .
This Tribunal finds merit in the arguments advanced and documents
placed on record by the Claimants and holds this issue in favour of the
Claimant . The Claimants were ready and willing to perform their
obligations under the Term Sheet and execute the draft Definitive
Documents .
Issue No. 7 : Whether the transaction's ) as contemplated in the Term
Sheet dated 26.11.2015 has been consum-rated and the Claimants
have performed conditions detailed in the Term Sheet dated
26.11.20157
Claimant mainly submitted that the transactions contemplated in the Term
Sheet had been consummed and parties had performed conditions
detailed in the Term Sheet . In support of their submissions , Claimants
reiterated the arguments advanced in earlier issues and further submitted
that the parties were not merely engaged in due diligence but were
actively engaged in consumption of the transaction by completing the
closing obligations under the Term Sheet . Following transactions were
alleged to have been consummed by the Claimants :
Transfer of Hotel Properties of Claimant No.1 to the Respondent :
Claimants submitted that :
44

Page 45:
www. Livelaw . IN
i . Under the Term Sheet , Claimant No.1 was obliged to facilitate the
transition of the properties maintained under the brand ' Zo Rooms ' to the
Respondent's network and the said obligation was fulfilled . It was
immaterial whether the Respondent actually took over the properties since
the focus of the Term Sheet was ceasing of Claimant No. 1's business .
ii . On 12.2015 , Mr. Abhinav Sinha of the Respondent
email ( Ex. G-23 ) setting out the property acquisition process and that the
on boarding of hotel properties was to happen in a single meeting .
iii . In compliance with the detailed procedure and conditions set out in the
email , Claimant No. 1 shared details of 400 properties and terminated its
contract with all 800 properties . Details of the same were available at a
dropbox link accessible by both parties . Reliance was placed on Ex. C-5 ,
Ex. C-21 and Cross-Examination of CW-4 )
iv. Respondent shortlisted 298 properties and expressed its intention to
acquire the same . CW4 facilitated visits by the Respondent's
representatives to selected hotel properties and accompanied them on
such visits . ( Reliance placed on Ex. C-5 , Ex. C-21
of CW-4 ) .
v. Claimant No. 1 shared details of points of contact ( POCs ) in
Ahmedabad , Amritsar , Indore and Bhopal and finished the process of
introduction of all the hotel owners with the Respondent's Representatives
by January 30 , 2016 . ( Reliance placed on Ex. C-21 )
vi. Respondent wrote to Claimant No. 1 , confirming that they had met with the
hotel owners and would onboard the hotels once they accepted their
deals . ( Reliance placed on Ex. C-21. )
vii . Upon Respondent's instructions , Claimants informed their hotel partners
that the Respondent was acquiring Claimant No.1's hotel business and
therefore , Claimant No.1's contracts would be transferred to the
Respondent . ( Relief on CW-4's Cross-Examination )
45
0 0

Page 46:
www.livelaw . IN
vii . For integration of properties in Respondent's business , Claimants sought
and received No Dues Certificate from almost all hotel properties .
ix . Access to the No-Dues Certificate was provided to the Respondent via the
DropBox Folder created for the transaction . ( Retired on Cross-
Examination of RW-1 and CW-2 )
x . As per Mr. Abhinav Sinha's email and action plan laid out ,
complied with the detailed steps laid down by the Respondent and
discharged its obligations in relation to property acquisition process
specified by the Respondent . Respondent had stated that after the
introduction of its Points of Contacts , OYO will take over the process and
that they will not be needing Claimant No.1 for contracting and signing
these properties . ( Reliance placed on Ex.C.5 , and testimony of CW-
xi . Hospitality industry is based on the relationships formed between the
stakeholders . Established relationships of Claimant No.1's Points of
Contact ( POCs ) with the hotel owners were exploited by the Respondent
to re-negotiate a better deal than the Respondent would have managed to
obtain otherwise .
Consumer Migration and Transfer of Confidential data . Claimants
submitted that :
i . All consumer traffic generating systems were transferred by Claimant No. 1
to the Respondent . ( Testimony of CW-3 relied upon )
il . Contracts from Online Travel Agents such as Just Dial and Sulekha were
determined and all leads were systematically transitioned to the
Respondent . ( Reliance placed on testimony of CW-3 and Ex. C-
iii . Claimant No. 1 also provided SEO Information , mobile App device IDs ,
website data to the Respondent and transferred the Just Dial and Sulekha
leads directly to their systems . ( Reliance placed on testimony of CW-3 )
iv. Claimants provided their SEO Report , Consumer Banking Details
( including name , phone number and email ) , unique user IDs of 4,93,86
46

Page 47:
www. Livelaw . IN
consumers who had installed the mobile application on android devices ,
app funnel details for 1.12.2015 to 17.12.2015 , unique user IDs
consumers who were using the mobile application of Claimant No.1 on
apple devices , keyword reports , website details of page views etc .
( Reliance placed on Ex. C-3 Colly )
v. Claimants had provided data pertaining to General Managers , Corporate
Account Contacts , Office Travel Agents . ( Reliance placed on Ex.C. 4 )
vi. Vide email dated 28.12.2015 , Respondent directed the Claimant to send
prepared communications ( for which templates were provided by the
Respondent ) to their prospective customers informing them that Claimants
would be unable to process the booking on account of transfer of business
to the Respondent and that the bookings made by such customers had
been redirected to the Respondent . ( Ex.C-1 ( Colly ) relied upon
Transfer of Future Bookings : Claimants submitted that
i 1505 future bookings of Claimant No.1 were transferred between
01.01.2016 and 31.01.2016 to the Respondent and the same has
admitted by the Respondent ( Ex. C. ( Colly ) and Ex.C
ii . By the middle of December 2015 , Claimant's focus was completion of
deal . Hence , on the instructions from the Respondent , no efforts were
made by Claimant No.1 to generate any leads or business . Any new
business opportunities were given up by the Claimants and
transferredforwarded to the Respondent . ( Ex. C. ( Colly ) relied
Transfer of Assets : Claimants submitted that :
i. Claimant No. 1 completed the transfer of assets as instructed and required
by the Respondent .
ii . Respondent shared an excel sheet wide email dated 12.01.2016 setting
out the data to be provided by Claimant No. 1 along with the timelines and
47 .
0.

Page 48:
www.livelaw . IN
the same was provided wide emails dated 23.01.2016 and 19.01.2016 .
( Reliance placed on Ex.C.1 (Colly ) and Ex.C.
iii . After receiving the data , Respondent revised the excel sheet and re-
shared it . All data was provided and verified except for the data that was
provided on ' Deal Date ' or ' Announcement Date ' . Thus , all requisitions till
that relevant point were provided . ( Reliance placed on Ex.C.2 ( Colly
Cross-Examination of CW-3 )
iv . The fact regarding transfer being complete was acknowledged by the
Respondent including the draft Framework Agreement filed by the
Respondent . Clause 4.3 of the said agreement was relied upon to show
that both parties had acknowledged the factum of transfer being complete .
Clause 4.3 read as follows :
" 4.3 . The Parties acknowledge that based on the commitment of
Oyo to consummate the Proposed Transaction , Zostel and Zo
Founders have already in good faith , initiated and substantially
completed a majority of their obligations identified under the
BTA , including but not limited to ( it ) obtaining resignation from a
majority of Zostel employees ; ( ii ) facilitating employment by
OYO of the employees selected by OYO from amongst these
resigning employees ; ( iii ) termination I dis-continuation of
arrangements with a substantial number of hotel owners
associated with Zostel and the facilitation of transitioning of
arrangements with such hotel owners in favour of OYO ; ( iv )
sharing of key databases and information regarding the
business of Zostel ; ( v ) fumishing all information in order to
enable the transfer of customer traffic from Zostel's website in
favour of OYO ; and ( vii ) handover of all customer bookings
booked with Zostel for stays falling after 1 January 2016 . "
48 .

Page 49:
www. Livelaw . IN
appropriate written , mutually agreed communication was sent to all the
stakeholders of Claimant No.1 , in accordance with the procedure for
transition and integration of the business set out by Mr. Abhinav Sinha of
the Respondent vice email dated 12 12.2015 . The same included but was
not limited to property owners , customers and employees intimating them
about the closure of operations of Claimant No.1 and Acquisition by the
Respondent :
The Claimant submitted that :
v. The obligations stood satisfied in view of the communications sent to
stakeholders as per the instructions of the Respondent such as :
Customers ( Reliance placed on Ex. C-1 )
employees ( Reliance placed on Ex. C-19 ( colly ) and Cross Examination
CW-5 ) .
Hotel Partners ( Cross Examination of CW-4 )
It was submitted that Claimant No. 1 also issued written communications to
vendors such as Airtel , assigning nominating business contracts in favour of
the Respondent . ( Ex. C-17 and Ex. C-23 relied upon )
Transfer of Employees : Claimants submitted that :
i . Claimant No.1 facilitated the hiring of all its employees that Respondent
wished to hire in accordance with Mr. Abhinav Sinha's email dated
12.12.2015 . ( Ex. C-19 ( colly ) retired upon )
ii . Respondent expressed its desire to take Claimant No. 1's entire tech and
design team on board and shortlisted those employees that it wished to
hire . Thereafter , the Respondent conducted interviews and hired certain
employees . ( Ex. C-9, Ex. C.20 , Ex.C
relied upon )
49 .

Page 50:
www. Livelaw . IN
iii . After hiring the selected employees by the Respondent , Claimants
provided full and final settlement of the said employees . ( Ex. C.25 ( Colly
and cross examination of CW-1 and CW-2 relied upon )
iv. In support of its submissions , Claimants relied upon Ex. C.19 Colly
C-42 to C.47 which were emails pertaining to
' Employee Integration ' where Respondent requested setting up interviews
' Shortlisted Candidates for OYO' wherein Respondent confirmed that
Claimant No.1 could seek resignations from selected employees and
make full and final settlements .
' Employee Closing FnF at Zo' confirming that some employees of
Claimant No.1 had already joined the Respondent . It confirmed that
Claimants had sent official communications to all campuses , full time hires
and interns that their internship was transitioned to OYO with the same
duration and stipend .
iii . Respondent No.1 on boarded Claimant No.1's interns . As
instructions and consent of the Respondent , Claimant No.1 received
resignation emails from employees who were selected by the Respondent .
This shows that Claimants not only performed their obligation in respect of
employee transfer under the Term Sheet but also under the Definitive
Documents . ( Ex. C-19 ( Colly ) and C-25 ( Colly
Handing over database and records related to customers , hotel owners ,
including contracts pertaining to live property and live property yet to go
live along with relationship contracts :
Claimants relied on Para 5.7.1 to 5.7.3 of the
that its compliance with the closing obligations is established .
a. Regarding Database and Records related to customers , it was reiterated
that Claimants shared android device IDs of 4.93,862 and apple device
IDs of 19,058 users who used Claimant No. 1's mobile application . Data
regarding Android Device IDs , Apple Device IDs , App funnel numbers ,
50

Page 51:
www. Livelaw . IN
app install daily active user numbers , device uninstall reports , SEO
landing page reports , web and mobile site data dump pages , Zo wallet
cash details etc. were also shared with the Respondent .
b. Database and Records related to hotel owners : At the instructions of Mr.
Abhinav Sinha of the Respondent , Claimant No.1 transferred :
Database pertaining to Jaipur Properties for upcoming pilot project .
Database of properties that would be part of transition properties in Delhi ,
Gurgaon , Bangalore , Mumbai , Hyderabad
List of Properties to be transitioned in Pune and Bangalore and Mr.
Mandar of the Respondent asked for deal details to start renegotiating
with them . ( Ex. C-19 ( colly ) and Ex. C-21
Respondent's conduct demonstrating consumption :
It was submitted that transaction contemplated under the Term Sheet was
consummated with the transfer of Hotel Business , employees , vendors
and all other assets of Claimant No.1 by the end of January 2016 .
Reliance was placed on the following in support :
a ) Order dated 12.2015 passed in CS (OS ) No. 1058/2015
Registrar , Delhi High Court recorded that both Respondent and Claimant
had compromised the matter in principal and terms of the same were
being finalized .
b ) Unqualified Public Announcement/Statement issued by SoftBank
highlighted the ' Acquisition of Zo Rooms ' by the Respondent as key
highlight of Respondent's business for the quarter . ( Relief on Mark A and
Ex. C-55 ( Colly . )
c ) The fact that transaction had already been consummed and Respondent
had acquired the business of Claimant No.1 is evident from the interview
of Mr. Ritesh Agarwal ( RW-3 ) published on 01.03
5 1 .

Page 52:
www. Livelaw . IN
interview , RW-3 was questioned about the acquisition of Claimant No.1
and he did not deny the statements put to him . RW-3 went on to explain
how consolidation with competitors would help in a significant manner and
benefit consumers . He did not indicate that multiple media reports about
acquisition of Zo Rooms were creating a wrong impression in the market .
d ) Consultation of the transaction is evident from WhiteApp conversation
of Mr. Ritesh Agarwal ( RW.3 ) and Mr. Dhar
which took place after the exit of Respondent's minority shareholder
Venture Nursery . RW-3 clearly stated that ' parties should get done and
back to execution ' since all issues were solved at the Respondent's end .
( Ex. C-53 relied upon )
e ) Email dated 27.07.2016 shows that pursuant to Claimant No.5's
conversation with Mr. Ritesh Agarwal , Claimants were asked to begin
closing process . ( Ex.C-2 relied upon )
Mr. Raghavan , Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent advanced
arguments in support of his submission that there has been no
consummation of the proposed transaction under the Term Sheet or drafts
of the Definitive Agreement . His arguments were based on four main
premises :
d. Failure to transfer the ' entire business ' of Claimant No. 1 as claimed .
e. Failure of Claimant No. 1 to transfer its ' Zostel ' hostel
f. Failure of Claimant No. 1 to complete the obligations mentioned in the
Term Sheet .
g. Misplaced reliance by Claimant on other aspects .
Regarding Claimant's failure to transfer the ' entire business ' , Respondent
submitted that :
52 .

Page 53:
www. Livelaw . IN
( H ) Claimant had set up a case that they had transferred their entire business .
Therefore , now , in view of the pleadings and evidence affidavits of CW-2 ,
CW-9 and CW-10 , if the claimants are unable to prove that Claimant
No.1's entire business has been transferred to the Respondent , then
Claimants cannot succeed in their claim .
( I ) A perusal of Claimant No. 1's financial statement for Financial year 2016
17 show that Claimant No. 1 continued to operate its business even after
31.03.2016 which is contradictory to its own claim that its entire business
was transferred to the Respondent by the end of January 2016 . ( Ex. R-1
and Ex. R-3 relied upon )
Claimant No.1 continued to retain its assets as well as employees and
continued to carry out its business contrary to the case sought to be set up
by them .
Regarding Claimant's failure to transfer its Zostel Hostel business , it was
submitted that :
c ) Claimants have set up a case that Respondent had decided not to acquire
Zostel Hostel Business . However , their stand is contrary to the drafts of
Definitive Agreements placed on record by the Claimants which records
that ' Zostel Hostel Business ' is an asset to be transferred by Claimant
No.1 to Respondent . No explanation has been offered by the claimants
on this aspect .
d ) Testimony of CW-1 was relied upon to state that Claimants true intent was
to transfer all such properties and employees of Claimant No.1 as the
Respondent saw fit to accommodate into its organization .
e ) Under Clause 10 of the Term Sheet , a non-compete , non-s
non-disparagement agreement was required to be executed by the
founders . In view of the said clause , Claimant No.1 could not have carried
53 .

Page 54:
www. Livelaw . IN
on the ' Zostel Hostel Business ' . However , despite categoric obligations ,
Claimants continue to carry on the said business even as on date . Hence ,
it is evident that Claimants have not fulfilled their obligations .
Regarding Claimant No. 1's failure to complete the proposed obligations
under the Term Sheet , it was submitted that
i . Claimants failed to transfer the identified assets mentioned under clause
3 . These identified assets included Intellectual Property Rights
( Trademarks and Domain Names ) , Software of Claimant No. 1 , Certain Key
employees of Claimant No.1 etc. ( Reliance was placed on Testimony of
CW-2, CW-3, CW-9 , Ex. R-58 , Ex
c-30 ) .
ii . Claimants failed to determine " minimum permissible price by law " under
clause 3 of the Term Sheet . This value was to be arrived at after obtaining
valuation report from an independent third party values , which was never
procured and finalized . Claimant has alleged that the reference to
" minimum permissible price " was to ensure tax efficiency and the value
was identified as Rs. 71 crores . However , the drafts of Definitive
Agreements circulated via email on 23.01.2016 provided that the numbers
mentioned in the draft Framework Agreement were subject to confirmation
by Respondent and thus were not the final figures .
iii . Claimant failed to complete the conditions precedent to ' closing of the
proposed transaction which is evident from the following :
Claimant No.1 never completed the legal and financial due diligence
process . ( Reliance placed on Ex. C.2,2. Ex.C.
23. Ex. R-38. R-40. R-41, R-42
Claimant No.1 never obtained all corporate , governmental , management ,
third party and exchange control . Other regulatory approvals stipulated
under sections 55 (2 ) , 62 (1 ) Companies Act , clauses 5 & 7 of
Sheet , Rule 13 Companies ( Share capital Debentures ) Rules , 2014 ,
54

Page 55:
www. Livelaw . IN
Foreign Exchange Management Act , 1999 were also not obtained .
( Reliance placed on testimony of CVV-1 ) .
The maxim Ex Dolo Malo Non Oritor Action was relied upon to state that
cause of action founded on illegally cannot be taken cognizance of or
accepted .
Claimant No. 1 never fulfilled the conditions identified under Annexure - I . It
was submitted that Claimant No. 1 did not withdraw all cases against the
Respondent as envisaged under the Term Sheet . Consumer traffic from
Claimant No.1's website , mobile application , calls emails , organic via
search engines , Justdial , Sulekha , Online Travel Agents , Office Travel
Agents , Traffic via hotel general managers , corporates and customer
database was not transferred to the Respondent . Claimant No. 1 continued
to receive bookings even after 01.01.2016 and continues to carry out their
business even as on date .
An undated letter has been placed on record alleging that the Airtel
Number belonging to the claimants had been transferred to the
Respondent . However , no confirmation of transfer has been placed on
record .
Testimony of CW-3 relied upon to state that no co-relation was ever done
between unique IDs and mobile numbers of individuals , Hence , the
information shared was completely useless . ( Reliance was placed on the
testimony of CW-3 in support of the same )
Claimant No.1 did not transfer its assets to the Respondent . Claimant
No.1 allegedly had 800 properties in 54 cities on its network . However ,
details of only 400 properties were shared . Out of the said 400 properties ,
115 properties were already on the Respondent's network . Claimant No. 1
introduced the Respondent only to the representatives of hotels in 1 city
out of 54 cities i.e. Chennai .
Claimants have argued that vice email dated 12.2.2015 , a detailed
roadmap was laid out by the Respondent for the proposed transaction .
55

Page 56:
www. Livelaw . IN
However , no document has been placed on record which shows that the
said ' detailed roadmap ' was compiled with by Claimant No.1 . No
communications have been issued to hotel partners and no full & final
settlements were made with them . The ones is on the Claimants to show
that they performed all their obligations and no evidence has been placed
on record in support of the same . Merely because a plan was laid out
does not mean that plan was executed .
Claimant No.1 did not issue any communication to any stakeholder
informing them about the closure of its business . Cross-Examinations of
CW-2 , CW-3 , CW-5 and CW-9 were relied upon to
communication were issued to Online & Office Travel Agents , Corporates ,
employees , Hotels , Consumer Traffic Generating Systems .
In order to assert that communications were issued to stakeholders ,
Claimant has relied on only 1 communication ( Ex. C-1 (colly ) pg
said communication only deals with future bookings which the Respondent
agreed to honor de hors the transaction proposed under the Term Sheet
The said communication does not state that Claimant No.1 is closing
down-transferring its operations . Despite claiming that they had thousands
of customers , Claimant No.1 has placed only one communication on
record to allege that obligation of informing its stakeholders has been
complied with .
Claimant No.1 has not handed over any database related to customers ,
owners , live properties including contracts etc. ( Retied on testimony of
CW-3 ) . Data pertaining to hotel properties that was shared was incomplete
and rifle with inaccuracies and discrepancies .
There is no document on record to show that Claimant No. 1 executed all
necessary documents to ensure that all employeeloption holder liabilities
of its employees were satisfied .
56 .

Page 57:
www. Livelaw . IN
Regarding failure of Claimant No. 1 to fulfill other conditions stated in the
Definitive Agreements , it was submitted that :
A table was placed on record perusal of the obligations and conditions
mentioned therein coupled with testimony of the Claimants' witnesses
shows that Claimants failed to fulfill any obligations/conditions mentioned
in the drafts of the Definitive Agreements .
Regarding failure of Claimant No. 1 to complete the obligations mentioned
in Annexure-11 of the Term Sheet , it was submitted that Claimant No. 1
its Founders never actually fulfilled their obligations as provided under
Annexure - II . Thus , they cannot claim any monetary compensation by way
of the present proceedings .
Regarding Claimant's reliance on other external factors , it was submitted
that :
Having failed to establish the factum of transfer of business from Claimant
No.1 to the Respondent , Claimants have sought to rely on various
external factors to assert that the business was transferred to the
Respondent . These factors cannot come to the Claimants' aid since they
have been unable to prove their assertion that the entire business was
transferred to the Respondent .
It was submitted that the reliance placed on SoftBank's announcement is
misplaced because it was made in accordance with the laws of USA and
Japan where the said company is listed . It was published in February
2016 , at which time it has not even been alleged that proposed transaction
had been consummed .
Reliance placed on disclaimer made specifically for Sprint is also
incorrect . Statement made by SoftBank cannot be attributed to the
Respondent as it is one of the multiple shareholders which cannot bind the
Respondent . Under Company law and Contract Law , shareholders can
give their approval through Shareholders' resolutions and signatures on
57 .
0 0

Page 58:
www. Livelaw . IN
the Definitive Agreement , not by way of unilateral emails or
announcement .
Reliance on clause 4.3 of the Framework Agreement is misplaced as the
said clause was unilaterally inserted in the draft of Framework Agreement
by Claimant No.1 .
Reliance placed on CNBC's interview with Mr. Ritesh Agarwal ( RW-
misplaced because despite repeatedly being questioned , he did not admit
that transaction had been consummed .
Reliance placed on emails dated 26.01.2016 and 30.01.2016 is misplaced
as the said emails were exchanged between parties who are not parties to
the present proceedings . Therefore , the same cannot be relied upon
without producing the authors of the said emails as witnesses
According to the estimate given by Claimant No.1 , for the period of
January-March 2016 , at least 3 lakh bookings ought to have been
received . Due to Claimant No.1's liquidity issues and believing the
promise of Claimant No. 1 that it would compensate the Respondent for
future bookings , Respondent in good faith , agreed to honour 1505 future
bookings . However , Respondent suffered severe losses and was
constrained to file a suit before . Hon't ble Delhi High Court seeking
damages . Therefore , Claimant No.1 cannot quite this issue before this
Tribunal .
Following arguments were inter alia advanced in rejoinder by the
Claimants :
I. Regarding Respondent's allegation that Claimant No.1 did not transfer all
its assetslproperties , it was submitted that the said allegation was
premised on the testimony of Mr. Ayush Mathur ( RW.2 ) who had
personal knowledge about the transaction in general and discussions in
relation to property transfer . None of the correspondence pertaining to
58 .

Page 59:
www. Livelaw . IN
property transfer was addressed to RW-2 and he had himself admitted
that discussions in this regard were led by Mr. Abhinav Sinha , Mr.
Manager Gulati and Mr. Abhishek Gupta .
ii . Claimants refuted the argument that consumers and live consumer traffic
had not been migrated from Claimant No. 1's platform to the Respondent .
It was reiterated that Mr. Abhimeet Sawa , the author of relevant documents
pertaining to consumer traffic migration and the person leading the
thinking and execution of consumer traffic migration was not produced as
a witness and persons not having personal knowledge about the same
were called to depose instead .
iii . Regarding transfer of future bookings , it was submitted that Respondent
has admitted the transfer of 1505 future bookings . A perusal of CSIDS )
63/2018 alleging damages for the loss , shows that it does not contain any
averment in respect of Respondent's acquisition of 1505 bookings and the
prayer clause also does not mention any losses caused as a result of
future bookings transferred by Claimant No. 1 to the Respondent . Reliance
was also placed on Reference Order dated 19.09.2018 passed by Hon'ble
Supreme Court in support of the submissions and it was submitted that
the plea has been taken as a means of avoiding adjudication of the
present claim .
iv. Respondent had argued that no records showing full and final settlement
with employees had ever been provided by the Claimants to the
Respondent . In order to refute the said submission , Claimants relied on
the testimony of CW-2 and Ex. C-15 Colly and stated that they had
demonstrated that all no dues certificates and full & final settlement letters
were in the desired format .
59 .

Page 60:
www. Livelaw . IN
Parties have been heard . The Term Sheet shows that the transaction i.e.
acquisition of Claimant No. 1 by the Respondent consisted of several steps
that were listed in Annexure I and Annexure II of the Term Sheet as
Closing and Post - Closing Obligations . The pleadings and documents
placed on record show that Claimant No.1 did perform some of the
conditions stated therein on the instructions of the Respondent . These
inter alla included termination of contracts with hotel properties , transfer of
Consumer Traffic to the Respondent , sending appropriate written ,
mutually agreed communication to stakeholders of the target intimating
them about closure of operations of the target and acquisition by the
acquirer and handing over data base and records related to customers &
hotel owners . It is also observed that obligations such as withdrawal of
pending suits was to be done simultaneously by both parties and was not
carried out in view of the turn of events and the issues raised by the
Respondent's shareholder , Venture Nursery . Some conditions remained
unfulfilled on the part of Claimant No. 1 due to the absence of instructions
from the Respondent .
A perusal of the pleadings and evidence placed on record , shows that the
Claimant performed part of its obligations under the Term Sheet as
instructed by the Respondent . The said obligations were performed in
compliance of the Term Sheet which was binding on the parties ( as held in
Issue No.4 ) and were not gratuitous acts . There is no document on record
which shows that the Respondent instructed Claimant No. 1 at any stage ,
to stop taking steps towards fulfilment of the obligations stipulated under
the Term Sheet . In fact , communications placed on record show that the
Respondent was instructing and coordinating with Claimant No.1
regarding various aspects of the transaction . This Tribunal holds that
Claimant No.1 carried out all acts within its control to consummate the
transactions contemplated in the Term Sheet and fulfilled the obligations
stipulated under the Term Sheet as instructed by the Respondent . The
60 .

Page 61:
www. Livelaw . IN
Claimant cannot be held responsible for the obligations that could not be
fulfilled due to lack of instructions on the part of the Respondent or due to
complications that arose due to the dispute raised by the Respondent's
minority shareholder , Venture Nursery .
Issue No.8 : Whether the Claimants prove that there was breach of
contract in terms of the Term Sheet dated 26.11.2015 by the
Respondent ?
Claimants mainly submitted that the transaction contemplated under the
Term Sheet was consummed between the parties upon performance of
all obligations by the Claimants to the satisfaction of the Respondent .
However , the Respondent failed to act upon the following obligations
under Annexure -I :
i . Respondent did not execute the Definitive Documents despite the same
having been ready for execution .
ii . Respondent did not pay the minimum purchase price permissible by law
as envisaged under clause 3 of the Term Sheet ie. Rupees 71 crores
which is the amount at which the shares were notionally valued .
iii . Rupees 7 1 crores was to be transferred to Claimant No.1 from
was to be transferred to an escrow account enabling individuals or group
of shareholders of Claimant No.1 to use this money to buy the shares of
Respondent Company for completion of transaction . Non-payment of this
amount disrupted the transaction and resulted in non-grant of the
promised 7/6 shares in the Respondent .
iv. Respondent did not complete the formally of simultaneous withdrawal of
civil suits against the claimants .
61 .

Page 62:
www. Livelaw . IN
v. Respondent failed to pay the founders the promised amount of USD 1
million despite completion of milestones .
Therefore , the Respondent had committed breach of contract .
It was further argued that the sole issue preventing the final closure of the
entire transaction was the unreasonable demands by Respondent's
minority shareholder ' Venture Nursery ' . Claimants had no role to play in
the resolution of the said issue : Respondent did not resolve the issue by
June 2016 which is the time by which Definitive Documents could still
have been executed . However , since the entire business of the Claimant
had been transferred by then , the Respondent had ensured elimination of
its closest competitor and received further funding of USD 163million ,
Respondent had no incentive to complete its end of the bargain for which
it had already received benefits .
In the matter at hand , parties have created a legally binding and
enforceable contract by way of conduct . Reliance was placed on Reveille
independent LLC vs. Anotech International ( England and Wales High
Court , Case No. 2013 Folio 1137 ) to state it is settled legal position
contract can be created by conduct even without formally executed
documents being in place .
It was argued by the Claimants that the Respondent's case is married with
inconsistencies . Respondent has deliberately produced witnesses who
neither have detailed knowledge of the transaction and nor were they
involved in major aspects of the transaction . When confronted with the
documentary evidence , they deliberately and with a malafide intent
provided interpretations inconsistent with the text of the document .
Section 59 and 63 of the Indian Evidence Act , 1872 along with the
judgments in Vikas vs . State of Maharashtra ( 2008 )2SCC 516 and
Bhugdomal gangaram & Ors. Vs State of Gujarat 1984 SCC C
62 .

Page 63:
www. Livelaw . IN
relied upon to state that oral evidence of a witness must be direct arising
out of the experience or involvement of a witness . Testimony of a person
based on information of another person is inadmissible in the absence of
examination of the said person as a witness . Testimonies of Respondent's
witnesses ought to be rejected as the witnesses have admitted lack of
awareness and knowledge of crucial aspects of the transaction and that
their testimony lacks credibility on account of contradictions and conduct
during their cross-examination . Respondent's case is built upon hearsay
evidence which is inadmissible in law . Respondent intended to hide
crucial facts had failed to produce Mr. Maninder Gulati and Mr. Abhinav
Sinha who led the transaction as witnesses despite both of them being still
employed with the Respondent . Attention was also drawn to the fact that
Respondent has deliberately suppressed material information from the
Arbitral Tribunal on the pretext of confidentiality despite Tribunal's Order
dated 02.11.2018 guarding confidentiality .
Respondent refuted Claimants' arguments and inter alia submitted that :
ii . There was no consensus at idern between parties in respect of the
Definitive Documents and there was no consumption of the transaction .
iii . Minimum Permissible Price by law was not determined and the said value
was to be arrived at after obtaining a valuation report from an independent
third party values in accordance with law . Such report was never procured
or sought to be procured .
iv. Withdrawal of pending suits was a closing obligation under Annexure -I of
the Term Sheet and Claimant No. 1 failed to fulfill the same .
v. In the absence of fulfillment of post-closing obligations and execution of
Definitive Documents , Claimants were not entitled to USD 1 million .
Regarding issues raised by Venture Nursery , it was submitted that the
Claimants were well aware of the objections raised by Venture Nursery
63 .
6 1 .

Page 64:
www. Livelaw . IN
and hence , cannot contend that there was consensus ad idern or
consummation of transaction stipulated under the Term Sheet or the
Definitive Documents . There was no binding contract between the parties
and hence there cannot be any breach of contract .
Regarding non-production of witnesses , Respondent argued that it had
produced 3 witnesses . Mr. Ritesh Agarwal ( RW-3 ) was a
Term Sheet and a proposed signatory to the Definitive Documents in his
capacity as a shareholder and responsible for the affairs of the company
as the CEO . Mr. Abhishek Gupta ( RW-1 ) is the Global
the Respondent . Claimants have relied on emails sent by him in support of
their case . Mr. Ayush Mathur ( RW-2 ) is the Chief Supply Officer
Respondent and is responsible for handling all hotel properties on the
Respondent's network . Therefore , he was the best person to oppose
regarding the properties on the Respondent's Network and whether any
properties were transferred from Claimant No.1 to the Respondent .
Moreover the witness was able to point out the inaccuracies and
discrepancies in the data provided by Claimant No.1 to the Respondent
Parties have been heard . In view of the arguments advanced , evidence
led by the parties and the findings in Issue Nos. 4. 5. 6 and 7 ,
Tribunal holds that while the Claimant was ready and willing to fulfill the
obligations mentioned in the Term Sheet and also performed part of the
obligations , the Respondent failed to do so . On being requested by the
Claimants for performance of simultaneous obligations such as finalization
and signing of the Definitive Documents , the Respondent kept assuring
that the same would be done once Venture Nursery's concerns were
addressed . Claimant No.1 continued to perform its obligations in
compliance of the Term Sheet . There is no document on record which
shows that the Respondent instructed Claimant No. 1 to stop taking steps
towards fulfilment of the obligations stipulated under the Term Sheet at
64

Page 65:
www. Livelaw . IN
any stage . Therefore , there was a legitimate expectation on the part of the
Claimant that the Respondent would also perform its part of the
obligations under the Term Sheet . However , as the Respondent failed to
perform its obligations , this Tribunal holds that Respondent committed
breach of its obligations under the Term Sheet .
Issue No.9 : Whether the claimants are entitled to specific
performance of the Term Sheet dated 26.11.2015 by directing the
Respondent to issue 7% of the present shareholding of the
Respondent in favour of Claimant No.2 to 17 pro-rated to their
respective shareholding of Claimant No. 1 ?
Claimants have argued that they are entitled to specific performance of
the Term Sheet dated 26.11.2015 and the Respondent has denied the
Claimants' submissions . Parties reiterated the arguments advanced earlier
in support of their submissions .
Clause 4 of the Term Sheet states that :
" The Closing shall be conditional upon fulfillment of the following
conditions :
i. Completion of limited legal and financial diligence of the Target .
ii . Target obtaining all corporate , governmental , management , third
party , exchange control and other regulatory approvals that are
necessary or advisable .
iii . Conditions identified under Annexure -1 ; and
iv. Any other conditions in the Definitive Agreements ( " Closing " )
It is hereby clarified that the term Closing , in case of a Merger
Framework shall mean the filing of the scheme of merger with the
court .
65 .

Page 66:
www. Livelaw . In
Upon closing :
( a ) Preference shareholders of the target shall be entitled to acquire
preferred securities ( which may include equity with contractual
rights ) " Preferred Stock " ) in the Acquirer .
( b ) Equity shareholders of the target shall be entitled to acquire equity
shares in the Acquirer . "
The total shares issued including . Preferred Stock and Equity
Shares shall not exceed 7% of the fully diluted shareholding of the
Acquirer . Upon completion of the post-closing obligations as set
out in Annexure-ll ( " Post closing obligations " ) , Founders shall be
entitled to a payout of USS 1million . "
Parties have been heard . Clause 4 shows that it is only upon ' closing ' , that
the preference and equity shareholders of Claimant No. 1 would have been
entitled to a total of 7% of the fully diluted shareholding of the
Acquirer"Respondent . ' Closing was conditional upon fulfilment of certain
conditions , one of which was fulfillment of obligations under the Definitive
Documents .
This Tribunal has held ( Issue No.5 ) that parties could not arrive at
consensus ad idem in respect of the Definitive Documents and the same
were not finalized on account of the objections raised by Respondent's
shareholder Venture Nursery , which was to be resolved by the
Respondents .
The Term Sheet was a binding document and the Claimant did everything
within their control to complete their obligations under the same . The
Claimant cannot be held responsible for the acts and emissions of the
66 .

Page 67:
www. Livelaw . IN
Respondent and/or its shareholders by virtue of which some of the
obligations could not be fulfilled by the Claimant . This Tribunal has held
that Claimant No.1 is entitled to claimIpray for the relief of allotment
shares from the Respondent to Claimant Nos. 2 to 17 .
It is clear that Definitive documents could not be executed because of a
problem created by a shareholder of the Respondent ( Venture Nursery ) ;
the Term Sheet is a binding document and parties were acting on it ; some
of the pending obligations could not be carried out due to lack of
instructions from the Respondent ; the Respondent has committed a
breach of its obligations under the Term Sheet and the Claimant did
everything within its control to complete its obligations under the Term
Sheet . ' Thus the Claimant cannot be held responsible for the acts and
omissions of the Respondent and/or its shareholders by virtue of which
some of the obligations under the Term Sheet could not be fulfilled by the
Claimant . Hence , the Claimant is entitled to Specific Performance of the
Respondent's obligations . However , as Definitive Agreements have yet to
be executed , the Tribunal holds that the Claimant is entitled to take
appropriate proceedings for Specific Performance and execution of the
Definitive Agreements as envisaged for itself and its shareholders under
the Term Sheet .
Issue No.10 : Whether the Claimants No.4 to 10 are entitled to the
payment of USD 1million dollars ?
Claimants argued that Claimant Nos. 4 to 10 are entitled to payment of
USD 1million dollars . Respondent refuted the said contention and stated
that Claimant Nos. 4 to 10 are not entitled to the said payment . Parties
reiterated the arguments advanced earlier in support of their submissions .
Clause 4 of the Term Sheet states that :
67
OP

Page 68:
www. Livelaw . IN
" The Closing shall be conditional upon fulfilment of the
following conditions :
g ) # Completion of limited legal and financial
diligence of the Target
h )000 Target obtaining all corporate , governmental ,
management , third party , exchange control and other
regulatory approvals that are necessary or advisable .
i ) Conditions identified under Annexure-l ; and
I ) Any other conditions in the Definitive
Agreements ( " Closing " )
It is hereby clarified that the term Closing , in case of a Merger
Framework shall mean the filing of the scheme of merger with the
court .
Upon closing :
( a ) Preference shareholders of the target shall be entitled to acquire
preferred securities ( which may include equity with contractual
rights ) " Preferred Stock " ) in the Acquirer .
( b ) Equity shareholders of the target shall be entitled to acquire equity
shares in the Acquirer . "
The total shares issued including , Preferred Stock and Equity
Shares shall not exceed 7% of the fully diluted shareholding of the
Acquirer . Upon completion of the post-closing obligations as set
out in Annexure-ll ( " Post closing obligations " ) , Founders shall be
entitled to a payout of USS 1million . "
For the reasons and the finding in issue No. 9 , it is held that the Tribunal
cannot grant the relief sought at this stage as the same is dependent on
68 .

Page 69:
www. Livelaw . IN
the fulfillment of post-closing obligations which stage will be reached only
after the Definitive Agreements are executed .
Issue No.11 : Whether as an alternative to specific performance ,
Claimants are entitled to an amount equivalent to 7% of the value of
the Respondent as per the last round of funding received by the
Respondent along with USD 1million dollars to Claimant Nos. 4 to
102
Claimants argued that they are entitled to an amount equivalent to 7% of
the value of the Respondent as per the last round of funding received by
the Respondent along with USD 1million dollars to Claimant Nos. 4 to 10 .
Respondent refused the said contention and stated that Claimants are not
entitled to the same . Parties reiterated the arguments advanced earlier in
support of their submissions .
In view of the finding that the Claimant is entitled to specific performance ,
the alternate relief becomes redundant .
Issue No. 12 : Whether Claimant Nos. 4 to 10 are entitled to interest on
the amount of USD 1million from the date of execution of the Term
Sheet , if so for what period and at what rate ?
Claimants argued that the Respondent has breached the contract .
Therefore , interest may be awarded at the rate of 1896 on USD 1 million
payable to Claimant Nos. 4 to 10 from the date of execution of the Term
Sheet till the date of grant of the award by the Hon'ble Tribunal .
Respondent refuted the said argument . Respondent reiterated its earlier
submissions and inter alia submitted that parties did not enter into a
69 .

Page 70:
www. Livelaw . IN
binding contract and there was no breach of contract . Hence , the
Claimants are not entitled to any interest .
This Tribunal has disallowed the claim of USD 1 Million at this stage .
Hence , the Claimant is not entitled to any interest on the same .
Issue No.13 : Whether the Claimants prove loss of goodwill and are
entitled to damages to the extent of 17million USD ?
Claimants submitted that they are entitled to damages on account of loss
of goodwill , reputation and inconvenience caused to them . It was mainly
submitted that :
i ) Under Section 21 of the Specific Relief Act , 1963 compensatory damages
can be awarded .
ii ) The Non-Performance of obligations by the Respondent and lack of
payment of consideration for the transaction has adversely affected
Claimant's goodwill and reputation , further causing great inconvenience to
the Claimant .
iii ) At the time of the transaction , Claimant No.1 was the second largest
player in the budget hotel segment . Within one year of its creation , it grew
into 4000 room nights with credible customer ratings . Therefore , it had
impeccable goodwill among all stakeholders .
iv ) Public announcement by SoftBank in February 2016 confirmed the
acquisition of Zo Rooms by the Respondent . News regarding acquisition
was also published in several other public media reports . " Relief on Mark
A and Ex. C-55 ) .
v) Claimant's hotel partners , booking agents , online platforms , customers
and other stakeholders thus , had the knowledge of the acquisition of
Claimant No. 1's hotel rooms business by the Respondent .
70

Page 71:
www. Livelaw . IN
vi ) However , later when the Respondent failed to honour its obligations and
committed breach of the contract , the goodwill of Claimant No.1 was
severely impacted .
vii ) Goodwill is a part of the value of business and is associated with the
brand name , customer relations and patronage , reputation amongst the
hotel partners and other such factors which generate economic benefits .
By breach of contract , the Respondent has severely affected the business
and goodwill of Claimant No. 1 .
viii ) Breach of contract by the Respondent has resulted in injury to Claimant
No. 1's goodwill , closure of business as it's hotel business was
transferred to the Respondent and adversely affected the hostel business
of Claimant No. 1 thus , resulting in severe pecuniary loss to the Claim
Respondent argued that the Claimant was not entitled to any damages on
account of loss of goodwill , reputation or inconvenience caused . It was
mainly submitted that :
vii . A perusal of the Statement of Claim , Replication and the Evidence
Affidavits show that there is no basis for such a Claim and the same is
vague and unsubstantiated .
viii . Claimant has not placed a single document on record or made any
averment regarding loss of goodwill .
ix . Claimant has not led any evidence to show that they have suffered loss or
the extent of such loss on account of breach of the Term Sheet .
x . In view of the law laid down in Ghaziabad Development Authority vs.
Union of India ( 2000 ) 6 SCC.13 ) , the said relief is liable to
the ground of complete lack of evidence .
The Tribunal has held that the Claimant is entitled to Specific
Performance . Hence , on Specific Performance , the goodwill of Claimant
7.

Page 72:
www. Livelaw . IN
would also be transferred to the Respondent . Therefore , the Tribunal
does not deem it fit to grant relief in respect of loss of Goodwill to the
Claimant . The same will be dependent on the outcome of the proceedings
for Specific Performance .
Issue No. 14 : Whether the Claimant No. 1 is entitled in the alternative
for payment of USD 88,922 , 7681-as claimed in the Replication ?
Clamant argued that as an alternative to the reliefs sought in the
Statement of Claim , it is entitled to an amount of USD 88,922,7681
principle of Quantum Meruit . Claimants mainly submitted that
v. Conduct of the parties demonstrated the existence of a valid contract .
Such a valid contract existed , in the very least , as per the understanding
between the parties that Claimant No. 1 would wind up its budget hotel
room business .
vi . If one party renders a service to another , not intending to do so
gratuitously and the other party has obtained benefits , then the first party
is entitled to compensation . ( Reliance placed on V.R. Subramanyam vs
Thayappa 1961 3 SCR 663 )
vil . The parties created a valid contract by conduct and acted upon it by
transitioning employees , assets and entire hotel rooms business of
Claimant No.1 to Respondent . Claimants did not do the said acts
gratuitously .
viii . Documents and evidence on record show that the Respondent did not
at any point of time , stop or restrain the Claimants from transitioning the
hotel business , nor did it furnish any reason for non-execution of the
Definitive Documents till the conclusion of business transfer . On the
72 .

Page 73:
www. Livelaw . IN
contrary , Respondent instructed the Claimants to transfer the business
and employees expeditiously . ( Ex. C-1colly and Ex. C-
ix . The main consideration of a Quantum Meruit Claim is the need to protect
the reasonable expectations of honest men . ( Retied upon Reveille
independent LLC ( supra )
x. Claimants acted upon the transaction in good faith and Respondent has
received the benefit of the bargain . Therefore , Respondent is liable to pay
compensatory reliefs on the basis of the principle of Quantum Meruit .
xi . Quantum Meruit is a principle of equity applicable to India as well other
jurisdictions . This Arbitral Tribunal is empowered to grant restitutionary
relief by application of Quantum Meruit since the claim is incidental to the
contract performed by the Claimants . Reliance placed on Government of
Gibraltar vs. Kenny and Ann. ( 919530 2 Q.B. 410
Ltd. vs. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. ( AIR 1975 Pat. 2/2 )
Power Co. Ltd. vs. General Electric Company and Ann. ( 1984 ) 4 SCC
679 .
xii . The Arbitration clause is broadly worded and the relief of Quantum Meruit
is incidental to and has arisen in relation to and pursuant to the Term
Sheet .
xiii . The Alternative relief sought is well substantiated , based on
documents and witness depositions . It is based on the post money
valuation before the initiation of negotiation for the transaction with the
Respondent .
a . The pre-money valuation of Claimant No. 1 prior to its last round of
B funding was USD 60,000,000 ( USD Sixty Million ) . ( Retied
examination of CW-7 )
b. Claimant No.1 was to receive further investment from its investors Tiger
Global and Orios Venture in 2 tranches and both investors had given an
unconditional undertaking to infuse funds for series B of funding . " Relief
on the cross-examination of CW-9 )
73 .

Page 74:
www. Livelaw . IN
c. The First tranche of USD Ten million was received in July 2015 . This
investment was made with the understanding that market value of
Claimant No. 1 is worth USD 88,922,768 .
d. If Respondent had not initiated negotiations for acquiring Claimant No. 1 ,
Claimants could have sought for the second tranche of Series B fund at
the requisite time . Claimant No. 1 did not pursue and seek further infusion
of funds solely on the basis of the transaction initiated with the
Respondent . ( Relief on the cross-examination of CW-1 )
e . Therefore , the loss of business of Claimant No.1 is to the tune of
88,922,768I- and was solely based on the Respondent's breach despite
having received the benefit of the bargain .
f. Respondent was privy to the facts pertaining to pre and post money
valuation of Claimant No. 1 and was aware of the valuation of Claimant
No.1 . As a part of due diligence process , Respondent was provided with a
copy of the revised Articles of Claimant No.1 post the Series B investment
along with the Shareholders Agreement . The same was also discussed in
email exchanges between CW-9 and RW-1 . ( Retied on Ex. C.
C-12 and Ex. C-40 )
g. After being informed about the post money valuation at USD 88,922.7681
Respondent neither questioned its veracity nor sought any additional
clarification or valuation reportdocument in support of the Claimants'
valuation . ( Relief on Ex. C-12 )
h. Mr. Abhishek Gupta ( RW-1 ) in his deposition stated that
valuation report was required to assess the figures , nor was it sought from
the Claimants . ( Relied on the cross-examination of RW-1 )
i . Respondent had no issues with the Claimants' valuation and it is only
during the course of the present proceedings that it has raised questions
challenging the veracity of the same .
74 .

Page 75:
www. Livelaw . IN
j. Respondent received a funding of USD 100 million and USD 62million
from SoftBank on the basis of acquisition of Claimant No.1's business
which was valued at 88,922,768l-
Respondent refuted the Claimant's Claim and submitted that the same
cannot be granted . It was mainly argued that :
e . This relief cannot be granted since it has not been sought in the Statement
of Claim and was introduced as a prayer in the replication to circumvent
the objections of maintaining raised by the Respondent . Reliance
placed on Anant Construction Pvl Ltd. vs. Ram Niwas ( 1994 ) ( 4
2015 .
f. The plea of Quantum Meruit has been raised for the first time during the
final arguments . There is no document on record to show that Claimant's
valuation was USD 88 Million . The Share Subscription Agreement and
Valuation Report are available but have not been placed on record and
purposely .
g. Alleged valuation included both Zo Rooms and Zostel Hostel Business
and Zostel Hostel Business was admittedly never transferred . Claimant
No. 1 is attempting to doubly compensate itself .
h. No funding was ever received from the investors by Claimant No.1 to
constitute the post money valuation . Therefore , its value never became
USD 88 Million .
i. In view of the law laid down in Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. vs
Communication Ltd. ( 2019 ) 5 SCC 341 , Puran Lal Sah vs. State
( 1971 ) 1 SCC 424 , Mulamchand vs. State of MR AIR 1968
Alopi Parshad & Sons vs. Union of India AIR 1960 SC 588 ,
submitted that the plea of Quantum Meruit is not sustainable because :
i ) If party is seeking specific Performance of a contract , then it cannot make
a claim for damages under Quantum Meruit arising from the same
contract .
75 .
Edit .

Page 76:
www. Livelaw . IN
ii ) This plea is mutually destructive of the original case .
iii ) Compensation on the basis of Quantum Meruit is based on the benefit
received by the alleged recipient and is distinct from damages of the
breach of the contract i.e. the measure of loss by the Claimant .
iv ) Measure of any compensation based on Quantum Mermit cannot be the
value of alleged loss suffered but only the value of benefit received .
v) Value mentioned in the Draft Definitive Agreement is 71 crores only . This
amount was payable subject to transfer of completientire business which
was never done . Claimants are not entitled to receive any amount from
the Respondent .
In rejoinder , Learned Counsel for the Claimants inter alla submitted that :
n. The rigors of CPC are not applicable to the Arbitration proceedings .
o. Pleadings in respect of the Quantum Meruit Claim are a part of the
Statement of Claim and relied on paras 6 , 6.2,6.2.6
in support of the same .
p. The Argument that Quantum Meruit claim was not raised till the final
arguments is erroneous . Pleadings pertain to facts and not law .
q. Separate issue was framed by this Arbitral Tribunal in respect of the
Quantum Meruit Claim . Opportunity to respond was given to the
Respondent by way of a Sur-Rejoinder along with the opportunity to lead
evidence . Therefore , no objection can be raised at this stage .
Parties have been heard . The principles of Quantum Meruit are
recognized under Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act , 1872 . The
question regarding the applicability of Section 70 was considered in
Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited vs. Tata Communications Ltd ( AIR
2019 SC 1233 ) as follows :
76 .

Page 77:
0 1
www. Livelaw . IN
" This Section occurs in Chapter V of the Contract Act , which
chapter is headed , " of certain relations resembling those
# created by contract . There are five Sections that are
contained in this Chapter . Each of them is posited on the
# fact that there is , in fact , no contractual relationship between
the parties claiming under this Chapter ... ... Here again ,
there is no contractual relationship between the parties . It is
in this setting that Section 70 occurs . "
And again in Mulamchand vs . State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1968 SC
1218 , as follows :
" The important point to notice is that in a case falling Under
Section 70 the person doing something for another or
delivering something to another cannot sue for the specific
performance of the contract , nor ask for damages for the
breach of the contract , for the simple reason that there is no
contract between him and the other person for whom he
does something or to whom he delivers something . So
where a claim for compensation is made by one person
against another under s. 70 , it is not on the basis of any
subsisting contract between the parties but on a different
kind of obligation . The juristic basis of the obligation in such
a case is not founded upon any contract or tort but upon a
third category of law , namely , quasi contract or restitution . "
The law laid down in Mulamchand ( supra ) has been upheld in Mahanagar
Telephone ( supra ) and also in Orissa Infrastructure Development
Corporation vs . Mesco Kalinga Steel Ltd. ( 2017 ) 5 SCC
0
In the matter at hand , a defined contractual relationship exists between
the parties . Since a binding contractual relationship exists between the
6tho .
77 .
Eo.

Page 78:
0 0
0 0

Page 79:
www. Livelaw . IN
" This Section occurs in Chapter V of the Contract Act , which
chapter is headed , " of certain relations resembling those
created by contract . There are five Sections that are
contained in this Chapter . Each of them is posited on the
fact that there is , in fact , no contractual relationship between
the parties claiming under this Chapter ... ... Here again ,
there is no contractual relationship between the parties . It is
in this setting that Section 70 occurs . "
And again in Mulamchand vs . State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1968 SC
1218 , as follows :
" The important point to notice is that in a case falling Under
Section 70 the person doing something for another or
delivering something to another cannot sue for the specific
performance of the contract , nor ask for damages for the
breach of the contract , for the simple reason that there is no
contract between him and the other person for whom he
does something or to whom he delivers something . So
where a claim for compensation is made by one person
against another under s. 70 , it is not on the basis of any
subsisting contract between the parties but on a different
kind of obligation . The juristic basis of the obligation in such
a case is not founded upon any contract or tort but upon a
third category of law , namely , quasi contract or restitution . "
The law laid down in Mulamchand ( supra ) has been upheld in Mahanagar
Telephone ( supra ) and also in Orissa Infrastructure Development
Corporation vs . Mesco Kalinga Steel Ltd. ( 2017 ) 5 SCC
In the matter at hand , a defined contractual relationship exists between
the parties . Since a binding contractual relationship exists between the
77 .
0 .

Page 80:
www.livelaw . IN
parties , Section 70 and the Principle of Quantum Meruit will not apply in
view of the law laid down in Mulamchand and Mahanagar Telephone
( supra ) , as well as in Orissa Infrastructure Development Corporation vs
Mesco Kalinga Steel Ltd. ( 2017 ) 5 SCC 86 . In view
binding contractual relation exists between the parties and that the
Claimant is entitled to Specific Performance of the Respondent's
obligations , this Tribunal holds that the alternate relief of Quantum Meruit
is not maintainable .
Issue No.15 : Who should bear the cost and if so to what amount ?
Learned Counsel for the Claimant submitted that the Claimant has
undergone loss of business and goodwill owing to the Respondent's
actions . The Respondent has benefited by acquiring Claimant No.1's
hotel business and has committed deliberate breach of contract .
Therefore , Respondent is a defaulting party . It is settled law that defaulting
party ought to bear the costs of the dispute under adjudication . Arbitral
Tribunal may be guided by Section 31A of the Arbitration and Constitution
Act , 1996 while granting costs . Claimants have sought the entire cost of
the proceedings along with the Cost of payment of Stamp Duty for
procuring stamp paper at the instructions of the Respondent .
In view of the arguments advanced earlier , Respondent denied that
Claimants are entitled to costs . It was submitted that costs of the entire
proceedings ought to be awarded in favour of the Respondent in addition
to the costs for application under Section 27 of Arbitration and Conciliation
Act , 1996 as already granted in favour of the Respondent wide order dated
22.06.2020 .
In view of the findings of this Tribunal , the Claimant is entitled to costs in
the cause .
78 .

Page 81:
www. Livelaw . IN
Issue No.16 : To what reliefs are parties entitled ?
In view of the above findings , this Tribunal holds that Claimant is entitled
to Specific Performance of the Respondent's obligations under Term
Sheet dated 26.11.2015 . However , as Definitive Agreements have yet to
be executed , the Tribunal holds that the Claimant is entitled to take
appropriate proceedings for Specific Performance and execution of the
Definitive Agreements as envisaged , for itself and its shareholders under
the Term Sheet .
Further , the Claimant is entitled to costs in the cause .
Justice A.M. Ahmadi ( Retd. )
Sole Arbitrator .
Date : 06-03-262 )
79 .
0 States

Page 82:


