THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACT, 1993 
   
 ACT NO. 10 OF 1994 
   
 [8th January, 1994.] 
   
  
 An  Act  to provide for the constitution of a  National  Human  Rights 
 Commission, State Human Rights Commissions in States and Human  Rights 
 Courts for better protection of human rights and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
  
      Be  it  enacted  by Parliament in the Forty-fourth  Year  of  the 
 Republic of India as follows:- 
  
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 PRELIMINARY 
   
  
                               CHAPTER I 
  
                              PRELIMINARY 
  
  
   
 1. 
   
 Short title, extend and commencement. 
   
  
      1.Short  title,  extend  and commencement. (1) This  Act  may  be 
 called the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993. 
  
      (2) It extends to the whole of India: 
  
      Provided  that it shall apply to the State of Jammu  and  Kashmir 
 only  in so far as it pertains to the matters relatable to any of  the 
 entries  enumerated in List I or List III in the Seventh  Schedule  to 
 the Constitution as applicable to that State. 
  
  
  
  
 2 
  
  
  
      (3)  It shall be deemed  to have come into force on the 28th  day 
 of September, 1993. 
  
   
 2. 
   



 Definition. 
   
  
      2.  Definition.- (1) In this Act, unless  the  context  otherwise 
 requires,-- 
  
      (a) "armed forces" means the naval, military and  air forces  and 
          includes any other armed forces of the Union; 
  
      (b) "Chairperson"  means the Chairperson of the Commission or  of 
          the State Commission, as the case may be; 
  
      (c) "Commission" means the National Human    Rights    Commission 
          constituted under section 3; 
  
      (d) "human  rights" means the rights relating to  life,  liberty, 
          equality  and  dignity of the individual  guaranteed  by  the 
          Constitution  or embodied in the International Covenants  and 
          enforceable by courts in India; 
  
          (e)  "Human  Rights  Court" means  the  Human  Rights   Court 
          specified  under section 30; 
  
          (f)   "International   Covenants"  means  the   International 
          Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the  International 
          Covenant  on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights adopted  by 
          the  General  Assembly  of the United  Nations  on  the  16th 
          December, 1966; 
  
          (g)   "Member"  means  a Member of the Commission or  of  the 
          State  Commission,  as  the case may  be,  and  includes  the 
          Chairperson; 
  
          (h)   "National Commission for Minorities" means the National 
          Commission for Minorities constituted under section 3 of  the 
          National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992  (19 of 1962); 
  
          (i)   "National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Sche- 
          duled Tribes" means the National Commission for the Scheduled 
          Castes and Scheduled Tribes referred to in article 338 of the 
          Constitution; 
  
          (j)  "National  Commission  for  Women"  means  the  National 
          Commission  for  Women  constituted under section 3  of  the 
          National Commission for Women Act, 1990  (20 of 1990); 
  
          (k)   "notification"  means a notification published  in  the 
          Official Gazette; 
  
          (l)   "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under  this 
          Act; 
  
          (m)   "public servant" shall have the meaning assigned to  it 
          in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860); 
  
          (n)   "State  Commission" means a State Human Rights  Commis- 
          sion constituted under section 21. 



  
      (2)  Any reference in this Act to a law, which is not in force in 
 the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall, in  relation to that State,  be 
 construed  as a reference to a corresponding law, if any, in force  in 
 that State. 
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
   
  
  
                               CHAPTER II 
  
                  THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
  
   
 3 
   
 Constitution of a National Human Rights Commission. 
   
  
      3.  Constitution of a National Human Rights Commission.- (1)  The 
 Central Government shall constitute a body to be known as the National 
 Human Rights Commission to exercise the powers conferred upon, and  to 
 perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act. 
  
      (2)  The Commission shall consist of- 
  
          (a)   a  Chairperson  who  has been a Chief  Justice  of  the 
          Supreme Court; 
  
          (b)   one Member who is, or has been, a Judge of the  Supreme 
          Court; 
  
          (c)   one Member who is, or has been, the Chief Justice of a 
          High Court; 
  
          (d)   two Members to be appointed from amongst persons having 
          knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to 
          human rights. 
  
      (3)  The Chairpersons of the National Commission for  Minorities, 
 the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled  Tribes 
 and the National Commission for Women shall be deemed to be Members of 
 the Commission for the discharge of functions specified in clauses (b) 
 to (j)  of section 12. 
  
  
      (4).  There shall be a Secretary-General who shall be  the  Chief 
 Executive Officer of the Commission and shall exercise such powers and 
 discharge such functions of the Commission as it may delegate to him. 
  
      (5)  The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi and the 
 Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central  Government, 
 establish offices at other places in India. 



  
   
 4. 
   
 Appointment of Chairperson and other Members. 
   
  
      4.  Appointment  of  Chairperson  and  other  Members.- (1)   The 
 Chairperson  and other Members shall be appointed by the President  by 
 warrant under his hand and seal. 
  
      Provided  that every appointment under this sub-section shall  be 
 made after obtaining the recommendations of a Committee consisting of- 
  
  
          (a)   the Prime Minister                      --chairperson; 
  
          (b)   Speaker of the House of the People      --member; 
  
          (c)   Minister-in-charge of the Ministry of   --member; 
           Home Affairs in the Government of India 
  
          (d)   Leader of the Opposition in the         --member; 
          House of the People 
  
          (e)   Leader of the Opposition in the         --member; 
          Council of States 
  
          (f)   Deputy Chairman of the Council          --member; 
          of States 
  
      Provided  further that no sitting Judge  of the Supreme Court  or 
 sitting Chief Justice of a High Court shall be appointed except  after 
 consultation with the Chief Justice of India. 
  
      (2)  No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid 
 merely by reason of any vacancy in the Committee. 
  
   
 5. 
   
 Removal of a Member of the Commission. 
   
  
      5.  Removal  of a Member of the Commission.- (1) Subject  to  the 
 provisions of sub-section (2), the Chairperson or any other Member  of 
 the  Commission shall only be removed from his office by order of  the 
 President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the 
 Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on 
 inquiry  held  in  accordance with the procedure  prescribed  in  that 
 behalf  by  the Supreme Court, reported that the Chairperson  or  such 
 other  Member,  as  the case may be, ought on any such  ground  to  be 
 removed. 
  
      (2)  Notwithstanding  anything in sub-section (1), the  President 
 way by order remove from office the Chairperson or any other Member if 
 the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be,-- 



  
          (a)   is adjudged an insolvent; or 
  
          (b)   engages  during  his  term   of  office  in  any   paid 
          employment outside the duties of his office; or 
  
          (c)   is  unfit to continue in office by reason of  infirmity 
          of mind or body; or 
  
          (d)   is  of  unsound  mind  and  stands  so  declared  by  a 
          competent court; or 
  
          (e)   is  convicted  and  sentenced to  imprisonment  for  an 
          offence which in     the  opinion of the  President  involves 
          moral turpitude. 
  
   
 6. 
   
 Term of office of Members. 
   
  
      6.  Term  of  office  of  Members.- (1)  A  person  appointed  as 
 Chairperson  shall hold office for a term of five years from the  date 
 on  which  he enters upon his office or until he attains  the  age  of 
 seventy years, whichever is earlier. 
  
      (2)  A person appointed as a Member shall hold office for a  term 
 of five  years  from  the date on which he enters upon his office  and 
 shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of five years: 
  
      Provided  that no Member shall hold office after he has  attained 
 the age of seventy years. 
  
      (3)  On ceasing to hold office, a Chairperson or a Member,  shall 
 be ineligible for further employment under the Government of India  or 
 under the Government of any State. 
  
   
 7. 
   
 Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in 
 certaincircumstances. 
   
  
      7. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions  in 
 certain  circumstances.- (1)  In the event of the  occurrence  of  any 
 vacancy  in  the  office of the Chairperson by reason  of  his  death, 
 resignation   or  otherwise,  the  President  may,  by   notification, 
 authorise  one  of  the Members to act as the  Chairperson  until  the 
 appointment of a new Chairperson to fill such vacancy. 
  
 (2)  When  the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions  owing 
 to  absence  on  leave or otherwise, such one of the  Members  as  the 
 President  may,  by  notification, authorise  in  this  behalf,  shall 
 discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the 
 Chairperson resumes his duties. 



  
   
 8. 
   
 Terms and conditions of service of Members. 
   
  
      8.  Terms and conditions of service of Members.- The salaries and 
 allowances  payable to, and other terms and conditions of  service  of 
 the Members shall be such as may be prescribed: 
  
      Provided  that  neither the salary and allowances nor  the  other 
 terms  and condition,  of service of a Member shall be varied  to  his 
 disadvantage after his appointment. 
  
  
 5 
  
   
 9. 
   
 Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate the proceedings of the Commission. 
   
  
      9.  Vacancies,  etc., not to invalidate the  proceedings  of  the 
 Commission.- No  act  or  proceedings  of  the  Commission  shall   be 
 questioned  or shall be invalidated merely on the ground of  existence 
 of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission. 
  
   
 10. 
   
 Procedure to be regulated by the Commission. 
   
  
      10.  Procedure  to  be  regulated  by  the  Commission.- (1)  The 
 Commission  shall meet at such time and place as the  Chairperson  may 
 think fit. 
  
      (2)  The Commission shall regulate its own procedure. 
  
      (3)  All  orders  and  decisions  of  the  Commission  shall   be 
 authenticated  by  the Secretary-General or any other officer  of  the 
 Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf. 
  
   
 11. 
   
 Offices and other staff of the Commission. 
   
  
      11.  Offices and other staff of the Commission.- (1) The  Central 
 Government shall make available to the Commission- 
  
  
          (a) an officer Of the rank of the Secretary to the Government 
          of   India  who  shall  be  the  Secretary-General   of   the 



          Commission; and 
  
          (b)   such  police and investigative staff under  an  officer 
          not  below the rank of a Director General of Police and  such 
          other officers no staff as may be necessary for the efficient 
          performance of the functions of the Commission. 
  
      (2)  Subject  to  such  rules  as may  be  made  by  the  Central 
 Government  in  this  behalf, the Commission may  appoint  such  other 
 administrative,  technical  and scientific staff as  it  may  consider 
 necessary. 
  
      (3)  The  salaries, allowances and conditions of service  of  the 
 officers   and  other staff appointed under sub-section (2)  shall  be 
 such as may be prescribed. 
  
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION 
   
  
  
                              CHAPTER III 
  
                 FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION 
  
   
 12. 
   
 Functions of the Commission. 
   
  
     12. Functions of the Commission.- The Commission shall perform all 
 or any of the following functions, namely:- 
  
          (a)   inquire, suo motu or on a petition presented to it by a 
          victim or any person on his behalf, into complaint of- 
  
               (i)   violation of human rights or abetment thereof; or 
  
               (ii)  negligence in the prevention of such violation, by 
               a public servant; 
  
          (b)   intervene in any proceeding involving any allegation of 
          violation  of  human rights pending before a court  with  the 
          approval of such court; 
  
          (c)   visit,  under intimation to the State  Government,  any 
          jail or any other institution under the control of the  State 
          Government, where Demons are detained or lodged for  purposes 
          of  treatment, reformation or protection to study the  living 
          conditions of the inmates and make recommendations thereon; 
  
  
 6 



  
  
  
          (d)   review   the  safeguards  provided  by  or  under   the 
          Constitution  or any law for the time being in force for  the 
          protection  of human rights and recommend measures for  their 
          effective implementation; 
  
          (e)   review  the factors, including acts of terrorism,  that 
          inhibit   the  enjoyment  of  human  rights   and   recommend 
          appropriate remedial measures; 
  
          (f)   study  treaties and other international instruments  on 
          human  rights  and make recommendations for  their  effective 
          implementation; 
  
          (g)   undertake  and promote research in the field  of  human 
          rights; 
  
          (h)   spread human rights literacy among various sections, of 
          society and promote awareness of the safeguards available for 
          the  protection  of these rights  through  publications,  the 
          media, seminars and other available means; 
  
          (i)   encourage the efforts of non-governmental organisations 
          and institutions working in the field of human rights; 
  
          (j)   such  other functions as it may consider necessary  for 
          the promotion of human rights. 
  
   
 13. 
   
 Powers relating to inquiries. 
   
  
     13. Powers relating to inquiries.- (1) The Commission shall, while 
 inquiring  into  complaints under this Act, have all the powers  of  a 
 civil court trying a suit under  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure, 1908 
 (5 of 1908),  and in  particular  in respect of the following matters, 
 namely:- 
  
  
          (a)   summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
          examining them on oath; 
  
          (b)   discovery and production of any document; 
  
          (c)   receiving evidence on affidavits; 
  
          (d)   requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof  from 
          any court or office; 
  
          (e)   issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
          documents; 
  
          (f) any other matter which     may be prescribed. 



  
      (2)  The  Commission  shall  have power to  require  any  person, 
 subject to any privilege which may be claimed by that person under any 
 law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such points 
 or matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be useful for, or 
 relevant  to,  the  subject matter of the inquiry and  any  person  so 
 required  shall  be  deemed  to  be  legally  bound  to  furnish  such 
 information  within the meaning of section 176 and section 177 of  the 
 Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
  
      (3)  The Commission or any other officer, not below the rank of a 
 Gazetted   Officer,  specially  authorised  in  this  behalf  by   the 
 Commission  may enter any building or place where the  Commission  has 
 reason to believe that any document relating to the subject matter  of 
 the  inquiry  may be found, and may seize any such  document  or  take 
 extracts or copies therefrom subject to the provisions of section 100, 
 of  the  Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in  so far  as 
 it  may  be applicable. 
  
  
  
 7 
  
  
      (4)  The, Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when 
 any offence as is described in section 175, section 178, section  179, 
 section  180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860). is 
 committed  in the view or presence of the Commission,  the  Commission 
 may,  after  recording  the facts constituting  the  offence  and  the 
 statement  of the  accused  as  provided  for in the Code  of Criminal 
 Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), forward the case to a  Magistrate  having 
 jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such  case 
 is  forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the  accused 
 as if the case has been forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code 
 of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
  
      (5)  Every proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be 
 a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section, 193 and 228,  and 
 for  the  purposes  of   section  196,   of  the  Indian  Penal   Code 
 (45 of 1860), and the Commission shall  be  deemed to be a civil court 
 for  all the purposes of section 195  and  Chapter  XXVI of   the Code 
 of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
  
   
 14. 
   
 Investigation. 
   
  
      14.  Investigation.- (1) The Commission may, for the  purpose  of 
 conducting  any investigation pertaining to the inquiry,  utilise  the 
 services  of  any  officer  or investigation  agency  of  the  Central 
 Government or any State Government with the concurrence of the Central 
 Government or the State Government, as the case may be. 
  
      (2)  For the purpose of investigating into any matter  pertaining 
 to  the  inquiry, any officer or agency whose  services  are  utilised 



 under sub-section (1) may, subject to the direction and control of the 
 Commission,-- 
  
          (a)   summon  and  enforce the attendance of any  person  and 
          examine him; 
  
          (b)   require  the discovery and production of any  document; 
          and 
  
          (c)   requisition any public record or copy thereof from  any 
          office, 
  
      (3)  The provisions of section 15 shall apply in relation to  any 
 statement made by a person before any officer or agency whose services 
 are  utilised under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation  to  any 
 statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the 
 Commission. 
  
      (4)  The officer or agency whose services are utilised under sub- 
 section  (1)  shall  investigate into any  matter  pertaining  to  the 
 inquiry  and  submit a report thereon to the  Commission  within  such 
 period as may be specified by the Commission in this behalf. 
  
      (5)  The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness of 
 the facts stated and the conclusion, if any, arrived at in the  report 
 submitted  to  it  under  sub-section (4) and  for  this  purpose  the 
 Commission  may  make such inquiry (including the examination  of  the 
 person  or persons who conducted or assisted in the investigation)  as 
 it thinks fit. 
  
   
 15. 
   
 Statement made by persons to the Commission. 
   
  
      15.  Statement  made by persons to the Commission.  No  statement 
 made  by  a  person  in  the course  of  giving  evidence  before  the 
 Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any  civil 
 or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false  evidence 
 by such statement; 
  
  
  
 8 
  
  
  
      Provided that the statement-- 
  
          (a)   is made in reply to the question which he is  required 
          by the Commission to answer; or 
  
          (b)   is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry. 
  
   
 16. 



   
 Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard. 
   
  
      16. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard.- If, 
 at any stage of the inquiry, the Commission- 
  
          (a)   considers  it necessary to inquire into the conduct  of 
          any person; or 
  
          (b)   is of the opinion that the reputation of any person  is 
          likely to be prejudicially affected by the inquiry, 
  
 it  shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being  heard 
 in the inquiry and to produce evidence in his defence: 
  
      Provided  that  nothing  in this section shall  apply  where  the 
 credit of a witness is being impeached. 
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 PROCEDURE: 
   
  
                               CHAPTER IV 
  
                               PROCEDURE 
  
  
   
 17. 
   
 Inquiry into complaints. 
   
  
      17. Inquiry into complaints.- The Commission while inquiring into 
 the complaints of violations of human rights may- 
  
          (i)   call  for  information  or  report  from  the   Central 
          Government or any State Government or any other authority  or 
          organisation  subordinate thereto within such time as may  be 
          specified by it: 
  
          Provided that- 
  
               (a)   if  the  information  or report  is  not  received 
               within the time stipulated  by  the Commission,  it  may 
               proceed to inquire into the    complaint on its own; 
  
               (b)   if,  on  receipt  of information  or  report,  the 
               COmmission  is satisfied either that no further  inquiry 
               is  required  or  that  the  required  action  has  been 
               initiated  or  taken  by  the  concerned  Government  or 
               authority,  it  may not proceed with the  complaint  and 
               inform the complainant accordingly; 
  



          (ii)  without prejudice to anything contained in clause  (i), 
          if it considers necessary, having regard to the nature of the 
          complaint, initiate an inquiry. 
  
   
 18. 
   
 Steps after inquiry. 
   
  
      18.  Steps  after inquiry.- The Commission may take  any  of  the 
 following steps upon the completion of an inquiry held under this Act, 
 namely- 
  
      (1)  where the inquiry discloses, the commission of violation  of 
 human  rights  or negligence in the prevention of violation  of  human 
 rights  by  a public servant, it may recommend to the  concerned  Gov- 
 ernment or authority the initiation of proceedings for prosecution  or 
 such other action as the Commission may deem fit against the concerned 
 person or persons; 
  
  
  
  
 9 
  
  
      (2)  approach  the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned  for 
 such directions, orders or writs as that Court may deem necessary; 
  
      (3)  recommend  to the concerned Government or authority for  the 
 grant of such immediate interim relief to the victim or the members of 
 his family as the Commission may consider necessary; 
  
      (4)  subject  to the provisions of clause (5) provide a  copy  of 
 the inquiry    report to the petitioner or his representative; 
  
      (5)  the  Commission  shall  send a copy of  its  inquiry  report 
 together  with  it's recommendations to the  concerned  Government  or 
 authority  and the concerned Government or authority shall,  within  a 
 period of one month, or such further time as the Commission may allow, 
 forward  its  comments on the report, including the  action  taken  or 
 proposed to be taken thereon, to the Commission; 
  
      (6)  the  Commission  shall publish its inquiry  report  together 
 with  the comments of the concerned Government or authority,  if  any, 
 and  the  action  taken  or proposed to  be  taken  by  the  concerned 
 Government or authority on the recommendations of the Commission. 
  
   
 19. 
   
 Procedure with respect to armed forces. 
   
  
      19.  Procedure with respect to armed forces.- (1) Notwithstanding 
 anything  contained  in  this Act, while dealing  with  complaints  of 



 violation  of  human  rights  by members  of  the  armed  forces,  the 
 Commission shall adopt the following procedure, namely:- 
  
          (a)   it  may,  either on its own motion or on receipt  of  a 
          petition, seek a report from the Central Government; 
  
          (b)   after  the  receipt of the report, it may,  either  not 
          proceed  with the complaint or, as the cage may be, make  its 
          recommendations to that Government. 
  
      (2)  The  Central Government shall inform the Commission  of  the 
 action  taken  on  the recommendations within  three  months  or  such 
 further time as the Commission may allow. 
  
      (3)  The  Commission shall publish its report together  with  its 
 recommendations made to the Central Government and the action taken by 
 that Government on such recommendations. 
  
      (4)  The Commission shall provide a copy of the report  published 
 under sub-section (3) to the petitioner or his representative. 
  
   
 20. 
   
 Annual and special reports of the commission. 
   
  
      20.  Annual  and  special  reports  of  the  commission.- (1) The 
 Commission shall submit an annual report to the Central Government and 
 to  the State Government concerned and may at any time submit  special 
 reports  on  any matter which, in its opinion, is of such  urgency  or 
 importance  that  it should not be deferred till  submission  of  the, 
 annual report. 
  
      (2)  The Central Government and the State Government, as the case 
 may  be, shall cause the annual and special reports of the  Commission 
 to  be laid before each House of Parliament or the  State  Legislature 
 respectively,  as the case may be, along with a memorandum  of  action 
 taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Commission 
 and the reasons for non-acceptance of the recommendations, if any. 
  
  
 10 
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 STATE HUMAN RIGHTS  COMMISSIONS 
   
  
                               CHAPTER V 
  
                    STATE HUMAN RIGHTS  COMMISSIONS 
  
   
 21. 
   



 Constitution of State Human Rights Commission. 
   
  
      21.  Constitution of State Human Rights Commission.- (1)  A State 
 Government may constitute a body to be known as  the.................. 
 (name  of  the State) Human Rights Commission to exercise  the  powers 
 conferred  upon,  and to perform the functions assigned  to,  a  State 
 Commission under this Chapter. 
  
      (2)  The State Commission shall consist of- 
  
          (a)   a  Chairperson who has been a Chief Justice of  a  High 
          Court; 
  
          (b)   one  Member  who  is, or has been, a Judge  of  a  High 
          Court; 
  
          (c)   one  Member  who is, or has been, a district  judge  in 
          that State, 
  
          (d)   two members to be appointed from amongst persons having 
          knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to 
          human rights. 
  
      (3)  There shall be a Secretary who shall be the Chief  Executive 
 Officer  of  the State Commission and shall exercise such  powers  and 
 discharge such functions of the State Commission as it may delegate to 
 him. 
  
      (4)  The  headquarters of the State Commission shall be  at  such 
 place as the State Government may, by notification, specify. 
  
      (5)  A  State  Commission  may inquire into  violation  of  human 
 rights only in respect  of  matters relatable to any  of  the  entries 
 enumerated in List II    and  List III in the Seventh Schedule to  the 
 Constitution: 
  
      Provided  that if any such matter is already being inquired  into 
 by  the Commission or any other Commission duly constituted under  any 
 law  for  the  time being in force, the  State  Commission  shall  not 
 inquire into the said matter: 
  
      Provided further that in relation to the Jammu and Kashmir  Human 
 Rights  Commission, this sub-section shall have effect as if  for  the 
 words and figures "List II and List III in the Seventh Schedule to the 
 Constitution", the words and figures "List III in the Seventh Schedule 
 to  the Constitution as applicable to the State of Jammu  and  Kashmir 
 and in respect of matters in relation to which the Legislature of that 
 State has power to make laws" had been substituted. 
  
   
 22. 
   
 Appointment of Chairperson and other Members of State Commission. 
   
  
      22.  Appointment  of  Chairperson  and  other  Members  of  State 



 Commission.- (1) The Chairperson and other Members shall be  appointed 
 by the Governor by warrant under his hand and seal: 
  
      Provided  that every appointment under this sub-section shall  be 
 made after obtaining the recommendation of a Committee consisting of 
  
          (a) the Chief Minister                   --chairperson; 
  
          (b) Speaker of the Legislative Assembly       - member; 
  
          (c) Minister in-charge of the Department      - member; 
              of Home in that State 
  
          (d) Leader of the Opposition   in the          -member: 
              Legislative Assembly 
  
 11 
  
      Provided  further that where there is a Legislative Council in  a 
 State,  the Chairman of that Council and the Leader of the  Opposition 
 in that Council shall also be members of the Committee: 
  
      Provided also that no sitting Judge of a High Court or a  sitting 
 district  judge shall be appointed except after consultation with  the 
 Chief Justice of the High Court of the concerned State. 
  
      (2)  No  appointment  of a Chairperson or a Member of  the  State 
 Commission  shall  be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy  in  the 
 Committee. 
  
   
 23. 
   
 Removal of a Member of the State Commission. 
   
  
      23.  Removal of a Member of the State Commission.- (1) Subject to 
 the  provisions  of  sub-section (2), the Chairperson  or,  any  other 
 Member of the State Commission shall only be removed from his   office 
 by  order  of the President on the ground of  proved  misbehaviour  or 
 incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference being made to it by 
 the  President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with the  procedure 
 prescribed  in  that behalf by the Supreme Court,  reported  that  the 
 Chairperson  or  such other Member, as the case may be  ought  on  any 
 such ground to be removed. 
  
      (2)  Notwithstanding  anything in sub-section (1), the  President 
 may by order remove from office the Chairperson or any other Member if 
 the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be,- 
  
          (a)   is adjudged an insolvent; or 
  
          (b) engages during his term of office in any paid  employment 
          outside the duties of his office; or 
  
          (c)   is  unfit to continue in office by reason of  infirmity 
          of mind or body; or 



  
          (d)   is  of  unsound  mind  and  stands  so  declared  by  a 
          competent court; or 
  
          (e)   is  convicted  and  sentenced to  imprisonment  for  an 
          offence which in the opinion of the President involves  moral 
          turpitude, 
  
   
 24. 
   
 Term of office of Members of the State Commission. 
   
  
      24.  Term  of  office of Members of the  State Commission.- (1) A 
 person  appointed as Chairperson shall hold office for a term of  five 
 years  from  the date on which he enters upon his office or  until  he 
 attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 
  
      (2)  A person appointed as a Member shall hold office for a  term 
 of  five  years from the date on which he enters upon his  office  and 
 shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of five years: 
  
      Provided  that no Member shall hold office after he has  attained 
 the age of seventy years. 
  
      (3)  On  ceasing to hold office, a Chairperson or a Member  shall 
 be  ineligible for further employment under the Government of a  State 
 or under the Government of India. 
  
   
 25. 
   
 Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in 
 certaincircumstances. 
   
  
      25. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in 
 certain  circumstances.- (1)  In the event of the  occurrence  of  any 
 vacancy  in  the  office of the Chairperson by reason  of  his  death, 
 resignation or otherwise, the Governor may, by notification, authorise 
 one of the Members to act as the Chairperson until the appointment  of 
 a new Chairperson to fill such vacancy. 
  
      (2)  When  the Chairperson is unable to discharge  his  functions 
 owing to absence on leave or otherwise, such one of the Members as the 
 Governor  may,  by  notification,  authorise  in  this  behalf,  shall 
 discharge 
  
  
 12 
  
  
 the  functions  of  the  Chairperson  until  the  date  on  which  the 
 Chairperson resumes his duties. 
  
   



 26. 
   
 Terms and conditions of service of Members of the State Commission. 
   
  
      26.  Terms  and  conditions of service of Members  of  the  State 
 Commission.  The  salaries and allowances payable to, and  other  term 
 anal  conditions  of service of, the Members shall be such as  may  be 
 prescribed by the State Government: 
  
      Provided  that  neither the salary and allowances nor  the  other 
 terms  and  conditions of service of a Member shall be varied  to  his 
 disadvantage after his appointment. 
  
   
 27. 
   
 Offices and other staff of the State Commission. 
   
  
      27.  Offices  and other staff of the State  Commission.- (1)  The 
 State Government shall make available to the Commission- 
  
          (a) an officer not below the rank of a Secretary to the State 
          Government   who  shall  be  the  Secretary  of   the   State 
          Commission; and 
  
          (b)   such  police and investigative staff under  an  officer 
          not below the rank of an Inspector General of Police and such 
          other  officers  and  staff  as  may  be  necessary  for  the 
          efficient   performance  of  the  functions  of   the   State 
          Commission. 
  
      (2)  Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government 
 in  this behalf, the State Commission may appoint such other  adminis- 
 trative, technical and scientific staff as it may consider necessary. 
  
      (3)  The  salaries, allowances and conditions of service  of  the 
 officers  and  other staff appointed under sub-section (22)  shall  be 
 such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
  
   
 28. 
   
 Annual and special reports of State Commission. 
   
  
     28. Annual and special reports of State Commission.- (1) The State 
 Commission  shall submit an annual report to the State Government  and 
 may  at  any time submit special reports on any matter which,  in  its 
 opinion,  is  of  such urgency or importance that  it  should  not  be 
 deferred till submission of the annual report. 
  
      (2)  The  State  Government shall cause the  annual  and  special 
 reports of the State Commission to be laid before each House of  State 
 Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature 
 consists  of one House, before that House along with a  memorandum  of 



 action  taken  or proposed to be taken on the recommendations  of  the 
 State Commission and the reasons for non-acceptance of the recommenda- 
 tions, if any. 
  
  
   
 29. 
   
 Application  of certain provisions relating to National  Human 
 RightsCommission to State Commissions. 
   
  
      29. Application of certain provisions relating to National  Human 
 Rights Commission to State Commissions.- The provisions of sections 9, 
 10,  12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 shall apply to a  State  Commission 
 and  shall  have  effect,  subject  to  the  following  modifications, 
 namely:- 
  
          (a)   references  to  "Commission"  shall  be  construed   as 
          references to "State Commission"; 
  
          (b)   in  section  10,  in  sub-section  (3),  for  the  word 
          "Secretary   General",   the  word   "Secretary"   shall   be 
          substituted; 
  
  
          (c)   in section 12, clause (f) shall be omitted;, 
  
          (d)   in  section  17,  in clause  (i),  the  words  "Central 
          Government or any" shall be omitted. 
  
  
  
 13 
                              CHAPTER  VI 
  
                          HUMAN RIGHTS COURTS 
  
   
 30. 
   
 Human Rights Courts. 
   
  
      30.  Human  Rights Courts.- For the purpose  of  providing speedy 
 trial of offences arising out of violation of human rights, the  State 
 Government may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the  High 
 Court,  by notification, specify for each district a Court of  Session 
 to be a Human Rights Court to try the said offences: 
  
      Provided that nothing in this section shall apply if- 
  
          (a)   a  Court of Session is already specified as  a  special 
          court; or 
  
          (b)   a  special  court  is  already  constituted, 
  



 for such offences under any other law for the time being in force. 
  
   
 31. 
   
 Special Public Prosecutor. 
   
  
      31. Special Public Prosecutor.- For every Human Rights Court, the 
 State  Government shall, by notification, specify a Public  Prosecutor 
 or appoint an advocate who has been in practice as an advocate for not 
 less, than seven years, as a Special    Public   Prosecutor  for   the 
 purpose of conducting cases in  that Court. 
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
   
  
  
                              CHAPTER VII 
  
                      FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
  
   
 32. 
   
 Grants by the Central Government. 
   
  
      32. Grants by the Central Government.- (1) The Central Government 
 shall,  after  due  appropriation made by Parliament by  law  in  this 
 behalf, pay to the Commission by way  of grants  such sums of money as 
 the Central  Government may think fit being utilised for the  purposes 
 of this Act. 
  
      (2)  The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for per- 
 forming  the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be  treated 
 as  expenditure payable out of the grants referred to  in  sub-section 
 (1). 
  
   
 33. 
   
 Grants by the State Government. 
   
  
      33.  Grants  by the State Government.- (1) The  State  Government 
 shall,  after  due appropriation made by Legislature by  law  in  this 
 behalf, pay to the State Commission by way   of  grants such  sums  of 
 money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the 
 purposes of this Act. 
  
      (2)  The  State Commission may spend such sums as it  thinks  fit 
 for performing the functions under Chapter V, and such sums shall  be 
 treated  as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in  sub- 



 section (1). 
  
   
 34. 
   
 Accounts and audit. 
   
  
      34. Accounts and audit.- (1) The Commission shall maintain proper 
 accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of 
 accounts  in such form as may be prescribed by the Central  Government 
 in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
  
      (2)  The  accounts  of  the Commission shall be  audited  by  the 
 Comptroller    and  Auditor-General  at  such  intervals  as  may   be 
 specified by him and     any  expenditure incurred in connection  with 
 such  audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller  and 
 Auditor-General. 
  
      (3)  The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed 
 by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission 
  
  
  
 14 
  
  
 under  this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the  au- 
 thority  in  connection  with  such  audit  as  the  Comptroller   and 
 Auditor--General  generally  has  in  connection  with  the  audit  of 
 Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right to  demand 
 the  production  of  books, accounts, connected.  vouchers  and  other 
 documents  and  papers  and  to inspect any  of  the  offices  of  the 
 Commission. 
  
      (4)  The  accounts  of  the  Commission,  as  certified  by   the 
 Comptroller  and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by  him 
 in  this  behalf,  together with the audit report  thereon   shall  be 
 forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission and the 
 Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as 
 may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
  
   
 35. 
   
 Accounts and audit of State Commission. 
   
  
      35.  Accounts  and  audit  of State  Commission.- (1)  The  State 
 Commission  shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant  records 
 and  prepare  an annual statement of accounts in such form as  may  be 
 prescribed   by  the  State  Government  in  consultation   with   the 
 Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
  
      (2)  The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the 
 Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be  specified 
 by  him  and any expenditure incurred in connection  with  such  audit 



 shall  be  payable  by the State Commission  to  the  Comptroller  and 
 Auditor-General. 
  
      (3)  The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed 
 by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the State  Com- 
 mission  under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges  and 
 the  authority  in connection with such audit as the  Comptroller  and 
 Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of  Govern- 
 ment  accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand  the 
 production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other  documents 
 and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the State Commission. 
  
      (4),  The accounts of the State Commission, as certified  by  the 
 Comptroller  and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by  him 
 in  this  behalf, together with the audit report  thereon,  shall   be 
 forwarded annually to the State Government by the State Commission and 
 the State Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as  soon 
 as may be after it is received, before the State Legislature. 
  
   
 CHAP 
   
 MISCELLANEOUS 
   
  
  
                             CHAPTER VIII 
  
                             MISCELLANEOUS 
  
   
 36. 
   
 Matters not subject to jurisdiction of the Commission. 
   
  
      36.  Matters not subject to jurisdiction of the  Commission.  (1) 
 The  Commission  shall not inquire into any matter  which  is  pending 
 before  a  State Commission or any other Commission  duly  constituted 
 under any law for the time being in force. 
  
      (2)  The  Commission  or the State Commission shall  not  inquire 
 into  any matter after the expiry of one year from the date  on  which 
 the act constituting violation of human rights is alleged to have been 
 committed. 
  
   
 37. 
   
 Constitution of special investigation teams. 
   
  
      37. Constitution of special investigation teams.- Notwithstanding 
 anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where 
 the Government considers it necessary so to do, it may constitute  one 
 or  more  special  investigation  teams,  consisting  of  such  police 
 officers  as  it thinks necessary for purposes  of  investigation  and 



 prosecution of offences arising out of violations of human rights. 
  
  
  
  
 15 
  
  
   
 38. 
   
 Protection  of action taken in good faith. 
   
  
      38. Protection  of action taken in good faith.- No suit or  other 
 legal  proceeding  shall  lie against the  Central  Government,  State 
 Government, Commission, the State Commission or any Member thereof  or 
 any   person  acting  under  the  direction  either  of  the   Central 
 Government,  State Government, Commission or the State  Commission  in 
 respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
 in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or any order made  thereunder 
 or  in  respect of the publication by or under the  authority  of  the 
 Central   Government,  State  Government,  Commission  or  the   State 
 Commission of any report, paper or proceedings. 
  
   
 39. 
   
 Members and officers to be public servants. 
   
  
      39.  Members and officers to be public servants.- Every Member of 
 the  Commission,  State  Commission and  every  officer  appointed  or 
 authorised  by  the  Commission or the State  Commission  to  exercise 
 functions under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within 
 the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
  
   
 40. 
   
 Power of Central Government to make rules. 
   
  
      40.  Power of Central Government to make rules.- (1) The  Central 
 Government  may,  by  notification,  make  rules  to  carry  out   the 
 provisions of this Act. 
  
      (2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
 foregoing  power,  such  rules  may provide for  all  or  any  of  the 
 following matters, namely:- 
  
          (a)   the  salaries  and  allowances  and  other  terms   and 
          conditions of service of the Members under section 8; 
  
          (b)   the  conditions subject to which other  administrative, 
          technical  and  scientific  staff may  be  appointed  by  the 
          Commission  and the salaries and allowances of  officers  and 



          other staff under sub-section (3) of section 11; 
  
          (c)   any  other  power  of  a civil  court  required  to  be 
          prescribed under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 13; 
  
          (d)   the  form in which the annual statement of accounts  is 
          to  be  prepared by the Commission under sub-section  (1)  of 
          section 34; and 
  
          (e)   any  other  matter   which  has  to  be,  or  may   be, 
          prescribed. 
  
      (3)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
 be  after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is  in 
 session,  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised  in 
 one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before  the 
 expiry of the session immediately following the session or the succes- 
 sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  modification 
 in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
 rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be  of 
 no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
 or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity  of  anything 
 previously done under that rule. 
  
   
 41. 
   
 Power of State Government to make rules. 
   
  
      41.  Power  of  State Government to make  rules.- (1)  The  State 
 Government  may,  by  notification,  make  rules  to  carry,  out  the 
 provisions of this Act. 
  
      (2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
 foregoing  power,  such  rules  may provide for  all  or  any  of  the 
 following matters, namely: 
  
          (a)   the  salaries  and  allowances  and  other  terms   and 
          conditions of service of the Members under section 26; 
  
  
          16 
  
  
          (b)   the  conditions subject to which other  administrative, 
          technical and   scientific  staff  may be  appointed  by  the 
          State Commission and the  salaries and allowances of officers 
          and other staff under sub-section (3) of section 27; 
  
          (c)   the  form in which the annual statement of accounts  is 
          to be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 35. 
  
      (3)  Every  rule made by the State Government under this  section 
 shall  be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each  House 
 of  the  State Legislature where it consists of two Houses,  or  where 
 such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 



  
   
 42. 
   
 Power to remove difficulties. 
   
  
     42. Power to remove difficulties.- (1) If any difficulty arises in 
 giving  effect to the provisions of this Act, the  Central  Government 
 may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
 not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be 
 necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
  
      Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the 
 period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
  
      (2)  Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
 after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
  
   
 43. 
   
 Repeal and savings. 
   
  
      43.  Repeal  and  savings.- (1) The  Protection of  Human  Rights 
 Ordinance, 1993 is (Ord. 30 of 1993) hereby repealed. 
  
      (2)  Notwithstanding  such  repeal,  anything done or any  action 
 taken  under  the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done Or 
 taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
  
  
  
                               K.   L. MOHANPURIA, 
  
                          Secy to the Govt. of India.