SCOUT SECURITY LIMITED 
ACN 615 321 189 
(Company) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PLAN 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 



TABLE  OF CONTENTS  

SCHEDULE 1 – BOARD CHARTER ............................................................................................ 1 
SCHEDULE 2 – CORPORATE CODE OF CONDUCT ................................................................. 7 
SCHEDULE 3 – AUDIT AND RISK COMMITTEE CHARTER ........................................................ 12 
SCHEDULE 4 – REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHARTER ........................................................ 18 
SCHEDULE 5 – NOMINATION COMMITTEE CHARTER ........................................................... 23 
SCHEDULE 6 – PERFORMANCE EVALUATION POLICY .......................................................... 27 
SCHEDULE 7 – CONTINUOUS DISCLOSURE POLICY ............................................................. 28 
SCHEDULE 8 – RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY ........................................................................ 30 
SCHEDULE 9 – TRADING POLICY .......................................................................................... 32 
SCHEDULE 10 – DIVERSITY POLICY ....................................................................................... 39 
SCHEDULE 11 – SHAREHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS STRATEGY.......................................... 42 
SCHEDULE 12 – WHISTLE-BLOWER POLICY ........................................................................... 43 
 

 

 

4427-01/1642368_1 



SCHEDULE  1  –  BOARD CHARTER  

1. ROLE OF THE BOARD 

The role of the Board is to provide overall strategic guidance and effective 
oversight of management. The Board derives its authority to act from the 
Company’s Constitution. 

2. THE BOARD’S RELATIONSHIP WITH MANAGEMENT 

(a) The Board shall delegate responsibility for the day-to-day operations and 
administration of the Company to the Chief Executive Officer/Managing 
Director.  

(b) Specific limits on the authority delegated to the Chief Executive 
Officer/Managing Director and the Executive Team must be set out in 
the Delegated Authorities approved by the Board. 

(c) The role of management is to support the Chief Executive 
Officer/Managing Director and implement the running of the general 
operations and financial business of the Company, in accordance with 
the delegated authority of the Board. 

(d) In addition to formal reporting structures, members of the Board are 
encouraged to have direct communications with management and 
other employees within the Group to facilitate the carrying out of their 
duties as Directors. 

3. SPECIFIC RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD 

In addition to matters it is expressly required by law to approve, the Board has 
reserved the following matters to itself. 

(a) Driving the strategic direction of the Company, ensuring appropriate 
resources are available to meet objectives and monitoring 
management’s performance. 

(b) Appointment, and where necessary, the replacement, of the Chief 
Executive Officer/Managing Director and other senior executives and 
the determination of their terms and conditions including remuneration 
and termination. 

(c) Approving the Company’s remuneration framework. 

(d) Monitoring the timeliness and effectiveness of reporting to Shareholders. 

(e) Reviewing and ratifying systems of audit, risk management and internal 
compliance and control, codes of conduct and legal compliance to 
minimise the possibility of the Company operating beyond acceptable 
risk parameters. 

(f) Approving and monitoring the progress of major capital expenditure, 
capital management and significant acquisitions and divestitures. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 1 

 



(g) Approving and monitoring the budget and the adequacy and integrity 
of financial and other reporting such that the financial performance of 
the company has sufficient clarity to be actively monitored. 

(h) Approving the annual, half yearly and quarterly accounts. 

(i) Approving significant changes to the organisational structure. 

(j) Approving decisions affecting the Company’s capital, including 
determining the Company’s dividend policy and declaring dividends. 

(k) Recommending to shareholders the appointment of the external auditor 
as and when their appointment or re-appointment is required to be 
approved by them (in accordance with the ASX Listing Rules if 
applicable). 

(l) Ensuring a high standard of corporate governance practice and 
regulatory compliance and promoting ethical and responsible decision 
making. 

(m) Procuring appropriate professional development opportunities for 
Directors to develop and maintain the skills and knowledge needed to 
perform their role as Directors effectively. 

2. COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD 

(a) The Board should comprise Directors with a mix of qualifications, 
experience and expertise which will assist the Board in fulfilling its 
responsibilities, as well as assisting the Company in achieving growth and 
delivering value to shareholders.  

(b) In appointing new members to the Board, consideration must be given 
to the demonstrated ability and also future potential of the appointee to 
contribute to the ongoing effectiveness of the Board, to exercise sound 
business judgement, to commit the necessary time to fulfil the 
requirements of the role effectively and to contribute to the 
development of the strategic direction of the Company. 

(c) The composition of the Board is to be reviewed regularly against the 
Company’s Board skills matrix prepared and maintained by the 
Nominations Committee to ensure the appropriate mix of skills and 
expertise is present to facilitate successful strategic direction.  

(d) Where practical, the majority of the Board should be comprised of non-
executive Directors. Where practical, at least 50% of the Board should be 
independent. 

(i) An independent Director is a director who is free of any interest, 
position, association or relationship that might influence, or 
reasonably be perceived to influence, in a material respect his 
or her capacity to bring an independent judgement to bear on 
issues before the Board and to act in the best interests of the 
Company and its security holders generally.  

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 2 

 



(ii) In considering whether a Director is independent, the Board 
should consider the definition of what constitutes independence 
as detailed in Box 2.3 of the ASX Corporate Governance 
Council's Corporate Governance Principles and 
Recommendations 3rd Edition as set out in Annexure A 
(Independence Tests). 

(e) Prior to the Board proposing re-election of non-executive Directors, their 
performance will be evaluated by the Remuneration and Nomination 
Committee to ensure that they continue to contribute effectively to the 
Board. 

(f) The Company must disclose the length of service of each Director in, or 
in conjunction with, its Annual Report.  

(g) The Company must disclose the relevant qualifications and experience 
of each Board Member in, or in conjunction with, its Annual Report.  

3. DIRECTOR RESPONSIBILITIES 

(a) Where a Director has an interest, position, association or relationship of 
the type described in the Independence Tests, but the Board is of the 
opinion that it does not compromise the independence of the Director, 
the Company must disclose the nature of the interest, position, 
association or relationship in question and an explanation of why the 
Board is of that opinion. 

(b) Directors must disclose their interests, positions, associations or 
relationships. The independence of the Directors should be regularly 
assessed by the Board in light of the interests disclosed by them.  

(c) Directors are expected to bring their independent views and judgement 
to the Board and must declare immediately to the Board any potential 
or active conflicts of interest. 

(d) Directors must declare immediately to the Board, and the Board will 
determine whether to declare to the market, any loss of independence. 

(e) No member of the Board (other than a Managing Director) may serve for 
more than three years or past the third annual general meeting following 
their appointment, whichever is the longer, without being re-elected by 
the shareholders. 

4. THE ROLE OF THE CHAIRMAN 

(a) The Chairman is responsible for the leadership of the Board, ensuring it is 
effective, setting the agenda of the Board, conducting the Board 
meetings, ensuring then approving that an accurate record of the 
minutes of board meetings is held by the Company and conducting the 
shareholder meetings. 

(b) Where practical, the Chairman should be a non-executive Director. If a 
Chairman ceases to be an independent Director then the Board will 
consider appointing a lead independent Director. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 3 

 



(c) Where practical, the Chief Executive Officer/Managing Director should 
not be the Chairman of the Company during his term as Chief Executive 
Officer/Managing Director or in the future. 

(d) The Chairman must be able to commit the time to discharge the role 
effectively. 

(e) The Chairman should facilitate the effective contribution of all Directors 
and promote constructive and respectful relations between Board 
members and management. 

(f) In the event that the Chairman is absent from a meeting of the Board 
then the Board shall appoint a Chairman for that meeting in an Acting 
capacity 

5. BOARD COMMITTEES 

(a) Once the Board is of a sufficient size and structure, reflecting that the 
Company’s operations are of a sufficient magnitude, to assist the Board 
in fulfilling its duties, the Board must establish the following committees, 
each with written charters: 

(i) Audit and Risk Committee;  

(ii) Remuneration Committee; and 

(iii) Nomination Committee. 

(b) The charter of each Committee must be approved by the Board and 
reviewed following any applicable regulatory changes. 

(c) The Board will ensure that the Committees are sufficiently funded to 
enable them to fulfil their roles and discharge their responsibilities. 

(d) Members of Committees are appointed by the Board. The Board may 
appoint additional Directors to Committees or remove and replace 
members of Committees by resolution. 

(e) The Company must disclose the members and Chairman of each 
Committee in, or in conjunction with, its annual report.  

(f) The minutes of each Committee meeting shall be provided to the Board 
at the next occasion the Board meets following approval of the minutes 
of such Committee meeting. 

(g) The Company must disclose in, or in conjunction with, its annual report, in 
relation to each reporting period relevant to a Committee, the number 
of times each Committee met throughout the period and the individual 
attendances of the members at those Committee meetings. 

(h) Where the Board does not consider that the Company will benefit from 
a particular separate committee: 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 4 

 



(i) the Board must carry out the duties that would ordinarily be 
assigned to that committee under the written terms of reference 
for that committee; and 

(ii) the Company must disclose in, or in conjunction with, its annual 
report: 

(A) the fact a Committee has not been established; or 

(B) if an Audit and Risk Committee has not been 
established, the processes the Board employs that 
independently verify and safeguard the integrity of its 
financial reporting, including the processes for the 
appointment and removal of the external auditor and 
the rotation of the audit engagement partner, and the 
process it employs for overseeing the Company’s risk 
management framework. 

6. BOARD MEETINGS 

(a) The Directors may determine the quorum necessary for the transaction 
of business at a meeting, however, until otherwise determined, there 
must be two Directors present at a meeting to constitute a quorum. 

(b) The Board will schedule formal Board meetings at least quarterly and 
hold additional meetings, including by telephone, as may be required. 

(c) Non-executive Directors may confer at scheduled times without 
management being present. 

(d) The minutes of each Board meeting shall be prepared by the Company 
Secretary, approved by the Chairman and circulated to Directors after 
each meeting. 

(e) The Company Secretary shall ensure that the business at Board and 
committee meetings is accurately captured in the minutes. 

(f) The Company Secretary shall co-ordinate the timely completion and 
distribution of Board and committee papers for each meeting of the 
Board and any committee. 

(g) Minutes of meetings must be approved at the next Board meeting. 

(h) Further details regarding Board meetings are set out in the Company’s 
Constitution. 

7. THE COMPANY SECRETARY 

(a) When requested by the Board, the Company Secretary will facilitate the 
flow of information of the Board, between the Board and its Committees 
and between senior executives and non-executive Directors. 

(b) The Company Secretary is accountable directly to the Board, through 
the Chair, on all matters to do with the proper functioning of the Board. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 5 

 



(c) The Company Secretary is to facilitate the induction and professional 
development of Directors. 

(d) The Company Secretary is to facilitate and monitor the implementation 
of Board policies and procedures. 

(e) The Company Secretary is to provide advice to the Board on corporate 
governance matters, the application of the Company’s Constitution, the 
ASX Listing Rules and applicable other laws. 

(f) All Directors have access to the advice and services provided by the 
Company Secretary. 

(g) The Board has the responsibility for the appointment and removal, by 
resolution, of the Company Secretary. 

8. ACCESS TO ADVICE 

(a) All Directors have unrestricted access to company records and 
information except where the Board determines that such access would 
be adverse to the Company’s interests. 

(b) All Directors may consult management and employees as required to 
enable them to discharge their duties as Directors. 

(c) The Board, Committees or individual Directors may seek independent 
external professional advice as considered necessary at the expense of 
the Company, subject to prior consultation with the Chairman. A copy 
of any such advice received is made available to all members of the 
Board. 

9. PERFORMANCE REVIEW 

The Nomination Committee shall conduct an annual performance review of the 
Board that: 

(a) compares the performance of the Board with the requirements of its 
Charter; 

(b) critically reviews the mix of the Board; and 

(c) suggests any amendments to the Charter as are deemed necessary or 
appropriate. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 6 

 



SCHEDULE  2  –  CORPORATE  CODE  OF  CONDUCT 

1. PURPOSE 

The purpose of this Corporate Code of Conduct is to provide a framework for 
decisions and actions in relation to ethical conduct in employment. It underpins 
the Company’s commitment to integrity and fair dealing in its business affairs and 
to a duty of care to all employees, clients and stakeholders. The document sets 
out the principles covering appropriate conduct in a variety of contexts and 
outlines the minimum standard of behaviour expected from employees. 

2. ACCOUNTABILITIES 

2.1 Managers and Supervisors 

Managers and supervisors are responsible and accountable for: 

(a) undertaking their duties and behaving in a manner that is consistent with 
the provisions of the Code of Conduct; 

(b) the effective implementation, promotion and support of the Code of 
Conduct in their areas of responsibility; and 

(c) ensuring employees under their control understand and follow the 
provisions outlined in the Code of Conduct. 

2.2 Employees 

All employees are responsible for: 

(a) undertaking their duties in a manner that is consistent with the provisions 
of the Code of Conduct; 

(b) reporting suspected corrupt conduct; and 

(c) reporting any departure from the Code of Conduct by themselves or 
others. 

3. PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL BEHAVIOUR 

When carrying out your duties, you should: 

(a) behave honestly and with integrity and report other employees who are 
behaving dishonestly; 

(b) carry out your work with integrity and to a high standard and in particular, 
commit to the Company’s policy of producing quality goods and 
services; 

(c) operate within the law at all times; 

(d) act in the best interests of the Company; 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 7 

 



(e) follow the policies of the Company; and 

(f) act in an appropriate business-like manner when representing the 
Company in public forums. 

4. CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

Potential for conflict of interest arises when it is likely that you could be influenced, 
or it could be perceived that you are influenced by a personal interest when 
carrying out your duties. Conflicts of interest that lead to biased decision making 
may constitute corrupt conduct. 

(a) Some situations that may give rise to a conflict of interest include 
situations where you have: 

(i) financial interests in a matter the Company deals with or you are 
aware that your friends or relatives have a financial interest in 
the matter; 

(ii) directorships/management of outside organisations; 

(iii) membership of boards of outside organisations; 

(iv) personal relationships with people the Company is dealing with 
which go beyond the level of a professional working relationship; 

(v) secondary employment, business, commercial, or other 
activities outside of the workplace which impacts on your duty 
and obligations to the Company; 

(vi) access to information that can be used for personal gain; and 

(vii) offer of an inducement. 

(b) You may often be the only person aware of the potential for conflict. It is 
your responsibility to avoid any conflict from arising that could 
compromise your ability to perform your duties impartially. You must 
report any potential or actual conflicts of interest to your manager. 

(c) If you are uncertain whether a conflict exists, you should discuss that 
matter with your manager and attempt to resolve any conflicts that may 
exist. 

(d) You must not submit or accept any bribe, or other improper inducement. 
Any such inducements are to be reported to your manager. 

5. PUBLIC AND MEDIA COMMENT 

(a) Individuals have a right to give their opinions on political and social issues 
in their private capacity as members of the community. 

(b) Employees must not make official comment on matters relating to the 
Company unless they are: 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 8 

 



(i) authorised to do so by the Chief Executive Officer/Managing 
Director; or 

(ii) giving evidence in court; or 

(iii) otherwise authorised or required to by law. 

(c) Employees must not release unpublished or privileged information unless 
they have the authority to do so from the Chief Executive 
Officer/Managing Director. 

(d) The above restrictions apply except where prohibited by law, for 
example in relation to “whistleblowing”. 

6. USE OF COMPANY RESOURCES 

Requests to use Company resources outside core business time should be referred 
to management for approval. 

If employees are authorised to use Company resources outside core business 
times they must take responsibility for maintaining, replacing, and safeguarding 
the property and following any special directions or conditions that apply. 

Employees using Company resources without obtaining prior approval could face 
disciplinary and/or criminal action. Company resources are not to be used for 
any private commercial purposes. 

7. SECURITY OF INFORMATION 

Employees are to make sure that confidential and sensitive information cannot 
be accessed by unauthorised persons. Sensitive material should be securely 
stored overnight or when unattended. Employees must ensure that confidential 
information is only disclosed or discussed with people who are authorised to have 
access to it. It is considered a serious act of misconduct to deliberately release 
confidential documents or information to unauthorised persons, and may incur 
disciplinary action. 

8. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/COPYRIGHT 

Intellectual property includes the rights relating to scientific discoveries, industrial 
designs, trademarks, service marks, commercial names ad designations, and 
inventions and is valuable to the Company. 

The Company is the owner of intellectual property created by employees in the 
course of their employment unless a specific prior agreement has been made. 
Employees must obtain written permission to use any such intellectual property 
from the Company Secretary/Chairman before making any use of that property 
for purposes other than as required in their role as employee. 

9. DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT 

Employees must not harass, discriminate, or support others who harass and 
discriminate against colleagues or members of the public on the grounds of sex, 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 9 

 



pregnancy, marital status, age, race (including their colour, nationality, descent, 
ethnic or religious background), physical or intellectual impairment, 
homosexuality or transgender. 

Such harassment or discrimination may constitute an offence under legislation. 
The Company’s executives should understand and apply the principles of equal 
employment opportunity. 

10. CORRUPT CONDUCT 

Corrupt conduct involves the dishonest or partial use of power or position which 
results in one person/group being advantaged over another. Corruption can 
take many forms including, but not limited to: 

(a) official misconduct; 

(b) bribery and blackmail; 

(c) unauthorised use of confidential information; 

(d) fraud; and 

(e) theft. 

Corrupt conduct will not be tolerated by the Company. Disciplinary action up to 
and including dismissal will be taken in the event of any employee participating 
in corrupt conduct. 

11. OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY 

It is the responsibility of all employees to act in accordance with occupational 
health and safety legislation, regulations and policies applicable to their 
respective organisations and to use security and safety equipment provided. 

Specifically all employees are responsible for safety in their work area by: 

(a) following the safety and security directives of management; 

(b) advising management of areas where there is potential problem in 
safety and reporting suspicious occurrences; and 

(c) minimising risks in the workplace. 

12. LEGISLATION 

It is essential that all employees comply with the laws and regulations of the 
countries in which we operate. Violations of such laws may have serious 
consequences for the Company and any individuals concerned. Any known 
violation must be reported immediately to management. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 10 

 



13. FAIR DEALING 

The Company aims to succeed through fair and honest competition and not 
through unethical or illegal business practices. Each employee should endeavour 
to deal fairly with the Company’s suppliers, customers and other employees. 

14. INSIDER TRADING 

All employees must observe the Company’s “Trading Policy”. In conjunction with 
the legal prohibition on dealing in the Company’s securities when in possession of 
unpublished price sensitive information, the Company has established specific 
time periods when Directors, management and employees are permitted to buy 
and sell the Company’s securities. 

15. RESPONSIBILITIES TO INVESTORS 

The Company strives for full, fair and accurate disclosure of financial and other 
information on a timely basis. 

16. BREACHES OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT 

Employees should note that breaches of certain sections of this Code of Conduct 
may be punishable under legislation. 

Breaches of this Code of Conduct may lead to disciplinary action. The process 
for disciplinary action is outlined in Company policies and guidelines, relevant 
industrial awards and agreements. 

17. REPORTING MATTERS OF CONCERN 

Employees are encouraged to raise any matters of concern in good faith with 
the head of their business unit or with the Company Secretary/Group Legal 
Counsel, without fear of retribution. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 11 

 



SCHEDULE  3  –  AUDI T  AND R ISK  COMMITTEE  CHARTER  

1. ROLE 

The role of the Audit and Risk Committee is to assist the Board in monitoring and 
reviewing any matters of significance affecting financial reporting and 
compliance. This Charter defines the Audit and Risk Committee’s function, 
composition, mode of operation, authority and responsibilities. 

2. COMPOSITION 

The Board will strive to adhere to the following composition requirements for the 
Committee where at all possible. However the Board acknowledges that the 
composition of the Board may not allow adherence to the following composition 
requirements from time to time. 

(a) The Committee must comprise at least three members. 

(b) All members of the Committee must be non-executive Directors. 

(c) A majority of the members of the Committee must be independent non-
executive Directors in accordance with the criteria set out in Annexure 
A. 

(d) The Board will appoint members of the Committee. The Board may 
remove and replace members of the Committee by resolution. 

(e) All members of the Committee must be able to read and understand 
financial statements. 

(f) The Chairman of the Committee must not be the Chairman of the Board 
of Directors and must be independent. 

(g) The Chairman shall have leadership experience and a strong finance, 
accounting or business background. 

(h) The external auditors, the other Directors, the Managing Director, Chief 
Financial Officer, Company Secretary and senior executives, may be 
invited to Committee meetings at the discretion of the Committee. 

3. PURPOSE 

The primary purpose of the Committee is to assist the Board in fulfilling its statutory 
and fiduciary responsibilities relating to: 

(a) the quality and integrity of the Company’s financial statements, 
accounting policies and financial reporting and disclosure practices; 

(b) compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and company policy; 

(c) the effectiveness and adequacy of internal control processes; 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 12 

 



(d) the performance of the Company’s external auditors and their 
appointment and removal; 

(e) the independence of the external auditor and the rotation of the lead 
engagement partner;  

(f) the identification and management of business, economic, 
environmental and social sustainability risks; and 

(g) the review of the Company’s risk management framework at least 
annually to satisfy itself that it continues to be sound and to determine 
whether there have been any changes in the material business risks the 
Company faces and to ensure that they remain within the risk appetite 
set by the Board. 

A secondary function of the Committee is to perform such special reviews or 
investigations as the Board may consider necessary. 

4. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMITTEE 

4.1 Review of Financial Reports 

(a) Review the appropriateness of the accounting principles adopted by 
management in the financial reports and the integrity of the Company’s 
financial reporting. 

(b) Oversee the financial reports and the results of the external audits of 
those reports. 

(c) Assess whether external reporting is adequate for shareholder needs. 

(d) Assess management processes supporting external reporting. 

(e) Establish procedures for treatment of accounting complaints. 

(f) Review the impact of any proposed changes in accounting policies on 
the financial statements. 

(g) Review the quarterly, half yearly and annual results. 

(h) Ensure that, before the Board approves the Company’s financial 
statements for a financial period, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief 
Financial Officer (or, if none, the person(s) fulfilling those functions) have 
declared that, in their opinion, the financial records of the Company 
have been properly maintained and that the financial statements 
comply with the appropriate accounting standards and give true and 
fair view of the financial position and performance of the Company and 
that the opinion has been formed on the basis of a sound system of risk 
management and internal control which is operating effectively. 

4.2 Relationship with External Auditors 

(a) Recommend to the Board procedures for the selection and appointment 
of external auditors and for the rotation of external auditor partners. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 13 

 



(b) Review performance, succession plans and rotation of lead 
engagement partner. 

(c) Approve the external audit plan and fees proposed for audit work to be 
performed. 

(d) Discuss any necessary recommendations to the Board for the approval 
of quarterly, half yearly or Annual Reports. 

(e) Review the adequacy of accounting and financial controls together 
with the implementation of any recommendations of the external auditor 
in relation thereto. 

(f) Meet with the external auditors at least twice in each financial year and 
at any other time the Committee considers appropriate. 

(g) Provide pre-approval of audit and non-audit services that are to be 
undertaken by the external auditor. 

(h) Ensure adequate disclosure as may be required by law of the 
Committee’s approval of all non-audit services provided by the external 
auditor. 

(i) Ensure that the external auditor prepares and delivers an annual 
statement as to their independence which includes details of all 
relationships with the Company. 

(j) Receive from the external auditor their report on, among other things, 
critical accounting policies and alternative accounting treatment, prior 
to the filing of their audit report in compliance with the Corporations Act. 

(k) Ensure that the external auditor attends the Company’s Annual General 
Meeting and is available to answer questions from security holders 
relevant to the audit. 

4.3 Internal Audit Function 

(a) Monitor the need for a formal internal audit function and its scope. 

(b) Assess the performance and objectivity of any internal audit procedures 
that may be in place. 

(c) Review risk management and internal compliance procedures. 

(d) Monitor the quality of the accounting function. 

(e) Review the internal controls of the Company via consideration of any 
comments from the Company’s internal and/or external auditors and/or 
commissioning an independent report on the Company’s internal 
controls. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 14 

 



4.4 Risk Management 

(a) Oversee the Company’s risk management systems, practices and 
procedures to ensure effective risk identification and management and 
compliance with internal guidelines and external requirements. 

(b) Assist in identifying and managing potential or apparent business, 
economic, environmental and social sustainability risks (if appropriate). 

(c) Review the Company’s risk management framework at least annually to 
satisfy itself that it continues to be sound. 

(d) Review reports by management on the efficiency and effectiveness of 
the Company’s risk management framework and associated internal 
compliance and control procedures. 

4.5 Other 

(a) The Committee will oversee the Company’s environmental risk 
management and occupational health and safety processes. 

(b) The Committee will oversee procedures for whistleblower protection. 

(c) As contemplated by the ASX Corporate Governance Council's 
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations, and to the 
extent that such deviation or waiver does not result in any breach of the 
law, the Committee may approve any deviation or waiver from the 
“Corporate code of conduct”. Any such waiver or deviation will be 
promptly disclosed where required by applicable law. 

(d) Monitor related party transactions. 

5. MEETINGS 

(a) The Committee will meet at least twice in each financial year and 
additionally as circumstances may require for it to undertake its role 
effectively. 

(b) Meetings are called by the Secretary as directed by the Board or at the 
request of the Chairman of the Committee. 

(c) Where deemed appropriate by the Chairman of the Committee, 
meetings and subsequent approvals and recommendations can be 
implemented by a circular written resolution or conference call. 

(d) A quorum shall consist of two members of the Committee. In the absence 
of the Chairman of the Committee or their nominees, the members shall 
elect one of their members as Chairman of that meeting. 

(e) Decisions will be based on a majority of votes with the Chairman having 
a casting vote. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 15 

 



(f) The Committee Chairman, through the Secretary, will prepare a report of 
the actions of the Committee to be included in the Board papers for the 
next Board meeting. 

(g) Minutes of each meeting are included in the papers for the next full 
Board meeting after each Committee meeting. 

6. SECRETARY 

(a) The Company Secretary or their nominee shall be the Secretary of the 
Committee and shall attend meetings of the Committee as required. 

(b) The Secretary will be responsible for keeping the minutes of meetings of 
the Committee and circulating them to Committee members and to the 
other members of the Board. 

(c) The Secretary shall distribute supporting papers for each meeting of the 
Committee as far in advance as possible. 

7. RELIANCE ON INFORMATION OR PROFESSIONAL OR EXPERT ADVICE 

Each member of the Committee is entitled to rely on information, or professional 
or expert advice, to the extent permitted by law, given or prepared by: 

(a) an employee of the Group whom the member believes on reasonable 
grounds to be reliable and competent in relation to the matters 
concerned; 

(b) a professional adviser or expert in relation to matters that the member 
believes on reasonable grounds to be within the person’s professional or 
expert competence; or 

(c) another Director or officer of the Group in relation to matters within the 
Director’s or officer’s authority. 

8. ACCESS TO ADVICE 

(a) Members of the Committee have rights of access to management and 
to the books and records of the Company to enable them to discharge 
their duties as Committee members, except where the Board determines 
that such access would be adverse to the Company’s interests. 

(b) Members of the Committee may meet with the auditors, both internal 
and external, without management being present. 

(c) Members of the Committee may consult independent legal counsel or 
other advisers they consider necessary to assist them in carrying out their 
duties and responsibilities, subject to prior consultation with the 
Chairman. Any costs incurred as a result of the Committee consulting an 
independent expert will be borne by the Company. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 16 

 



9. REVIEW OF CHARTER 

(a) The Board will conduct an annual review of the membership to ensure 
that the Committee has carried out its functions in an effective manner, 
and will update the Charter as required or as a result of new laws or 
regulations. 

(b) The Charter shall be made available to members on request, to senior 
management, to the external auditor and to other parties as deemed 
appropriate and will be posted to the Company’s website. 

10. REPORT TO THE BOARD 

(a) The Committee must report to the Board formally at the next Board 
meeting following from the last Committee meeting on matters relevant 
to the Committee’s role and responsibilities. 

(b) The Committee must brief the Board promptly on all urgent and 
significant matters. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 17 

 



SCHEDULE  4  –  REMUNERATION COMMITTEE  CHARTER  

1. ROLE 

The role of the Remuneration Committee is to assist the Board in monitoring and 
reviewing any matters of significance affecting the remuneration of the Board 
and employees of the Company. This Charter defines the Remuneration 
Committee’s function, composition, mode of operation, authority and 
responsibilities. 

2. COMPOSITION 

The Board will strive to adhere to the following composition requirements for the 
Committee where at all possible. However the Board acknowledges that the 
composition of the Board may not allow adherence to the following composition 
requirements from time to time. 

(a) The Committee shall comprise at least three Directors, the majority being 
independent non-executive Directors. 

(b) The Committee will be chaired by an independent Director who will be 
appointed by the Board. 

(c) The Board may appoint such additional non-executive Directors to the 
Committee or remove and replace members of the Committee by 
resolution. 

3. PURPOSE 

The primary purpose of the Committee is to support and advise the Board in 
fulfilling its responsibilities to shareholders by: 

(a) reviewing and approving the executive remuneration policy to enable 
the Company to attract and retain executives and Directors who will 
create value for shareholders; 

(b) ensuring that the executive remuneration policy demonstrates a clear 
relationship between key executive performance and remuneration; 

(c) recommending to the Board the remuneration of executive Directors; 

(d) fairly and responsibly rewarding executives having regard to the 
performance of the Group, the performance of the executive and the 
prevailing remuneration expectations in the market; 

(e) reviewing the Company’s recruitment, retention and termination policies 
and procedures for senior management; 

(f) reviewing and approving the remuneration of direct reports to the Chief 
Executive Officer/Managing Director, and as appropriate other senior 
executives; and 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 18 

 



(g) reviewing and approving any equity based plans and other incentive 
schemes. 

4. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

4.1 Executive Remuneration Policy 

(a) Review and approve the Group’s recruitment, retention and termination 
policies and procedures for senior executives to enable the Company to 
attract and retain executives and Directors who can create value for 
shareholders. 

(b) Review the on-going appropriateness and relevance of the executive 
remuneration policy and other executive benefit programs. 

(c) Ensure that remuneration policies fairly and responsibly reward 
executives having regard to the performance of the Company, the 
performance of the executive and prevailing remuneration expectations 
in the market. 

4.2 Executive Directors and Senior Management 

(a) Consider and make recommendations to the Board on the remuneration 
for each executive Director (including base pay, incentive payments, 
equity awards, retirement rights, service contracts) having regard to the 
executive remuneration policy. 

(b) Review and approve the proposed remuneration (including incentive 
awards, equity awards and service contracts) for the direct reports of the 
Chief Executive Officer/Managing Director. As part of this review the 
Committee will oversee an annual performance evaluation of the senior 
executive team. This evaluation is based on specific criteria, including the 
business performance of the Company and its subsidiaries, whether 
strategic objectives are being achieved and the development of 
management and personnel. 

(c) Approve changes to the remuneration or contract terms of executive 
Directors and direct reports to the Chief Executive Officer/Managing 
Director. 

(d) Approve termination payments to executive Directors or direct reports to 
the Chief Executive Officer/Managing Director. Termination payments to 
other departing executives should be reported to the Committee at its 
next meeting. 

4.3 Executive Incentive Plans (including Equity Based Plans) 

(a) Review and approve the design of any executive incentive plans (Plans). 

(b) Review and approve any Plans that may be introduced in the light of 
legislative, regulatory and market developments. 

(c) For each Plan, determine each year whether awards will be made under 
that Plan. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 19 

 



(d) Review and approve total proposed awards under each Plan. 

(e) In addition to considering awards to executive Directors and direct 
reports to the Chief Executive Officer/Managing Director, review and 
approve proposed awards under each Plan on an individual basis for 
executives as required under the rules governing each Plan or as 
determined by the Committee. 

(f) Review, approve and keep under review performance hurdles for each 
Plan. 

(g) Review, manage and disclose the policy (if any) under which 
participants to a Plan may be permitted (at the discretion of the 
Company) to enter into transactions (whether through the use of 
derivatives or otherwise) which limit the economic risk of participating in 
the Plan. 

4.4 Other 

The Committee shall perform other duties and activities that it or the Board 
considers appropriate. 

5. MEETINGS 

(a) The Committee will meet at least once per year and additionally as 
circumstances may require. 

(b) Meetings are called by the Secretary as directed by the Board or at the 
request of the Chairman of the Committee. 

(c) A quorum shall comprise any two members of the Committee. In the 
absence of the Committee Chairman or appointed delegate, the 
members shall elect one of their members as Chairman. 

(d) Where deemed appropriate by the Chairman of the Committee, 
meetings and subsequent approvals may be held or concluded by way 
of a circular written resolution or a conference call. 

(e) Decisions will be based on a majority of votes with the Chairman having 
the casting vote. 

(f) The Committee may invite any executive management team members 
or other individuals, including external third parties, to attend meetings of 
the Committee, as they consider appropriate. 

6. SECRETARY 

(a) The Company Secretary or their nominee shall be the Secretary of the 
Committee, and shall attend meetings of the Committee as required. 

(b) The Secretary will be responsible for keeping the minutes of meeting of 
the Committee and circulating them to Committee members and to the 
other members of the Board. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 20 

 



(c) The Secretary shall distribute supporting papers for each meeting of the 
Committee as far in advance as possible. 

7. RELIANCE ON INFORMATION OR PROFESSIONAL OR EXPERT ADVICE 

Each member of the Committee is entitled to rely on information, or professional 
or expert advice, to the extent permitted by law, given or prepared by: 

(a) an employee of the Group whom the member believes on reasonable 
grounds to be reliable and competent in relation to the matters 
concerned; 

(b) a professional adviser or expert in relation to matters that the member 
believes on reasonable grounds to be within the person’s professional or 
expert competence; or 

(c) another Director or officer of the Group in relation to matters within the 
Director’s or officer’s authority. 

8. ACCESS TO ADVICE 

(a) Members of the Committee have rights of access to the books and 
records of the Company to enable them to discharge their duties as 
Committee members, except where the Board determines that such 
access would be adverse to the Company’s interests. 

(b) The Committee may consult independent experts to assist it in carrying 
out its duties and responsibilities. Any costs incurred as a result of the 
Committee consulting an independent expert will be borne by the 
Company. 

9. REVIEW OF CHARTER 

(a) The Board will conduct an annual review of the membership to ensure 
that the Committee has carried out its functions in an effective manner, 
and will update the Charter as required or as a result of new laws or 
regulations. 

(b) The Charter shall be made available to members on request, to senior 
management, to the external auditor and to other parties as deemed 
appropriate and will be posted to the Company’s website. 

10. REPORTING 

(a) The Committee must report to the Board formally at the next Board 
meeting following from the last Committee meeting on matters relevant 
to the Committee’s role and responsibilities. 

(b) The Committee must brief the Board promptly on all urgent and 
significant matters. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 21 

 



(c) The Company must disclose the policies and practices regarding the 
remuneration of non-executive directors, executive directors and other 
senior executives in the annual report and as otherwise required by law.  

 

  

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 22 

 



SCHEDULE  5  –  NOMINATION COMMITTEE  CHARTER  

1. ROLE 

The role of the Nomination Committee is to assist the Board in monitoring and 
reviewing any matters of significance affecting the composition of the Board and 
the Executive Team. This Charter defines the Nomination Committee’s function, 
composition, mode of operation, authority and responsibilities. 

2. COMPOSITION 

The Board will strive to adhere to the following composition requirements for the 
Committee where at all possible. However the Board acknowledges that the 
composition of the Board may not allow adherence to the following composition 
requirements from time to time. 

(a) The Committee shall comprise at least three non-executive Directors, the 
majority of whom must be independent, one of whom will be appointed 
the Committee Chairman. 

(b) The Board may appoint additional non-executive Directors to the 
Committee or remove and replace members of the Committee by 
resolution. 

3. PURPOSE 

The primary purpose of the Committee is to support and advise the Board in: 

(a) maintaining a Board that has an appropriate mix of skills and experience 
to be an effective decision-making body; and 

(b) ensuring that the Board is comprised of Directors who contribute to the 
successful management of the Company and discharge their duties 
having regard to the law and the highest standards of corporate 
governance. 

4. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMITTEE 

(a) Periodically review and consider the structure and balance of the Board 
and make recommendations regarding appointments, retirements and 
terms of office of Directors. 

(b) Make recommendations to the Board on the appropriate size and 
composition of the Board. 

(c) Identify and recommend to the Board candidates for the Board after 
considering the necessary and desirable competencies of new Board 
members to ensure the appropriate mix of skills and experience and after 
assessment of how the candidates can contribute to the strategic 
direction of the Company. 

(d) Undertake appropriate checks before appointing a candidate, or 
putting forward to security holders a candidate for election, as a 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 23 

 



Director, including checks in respect of character, experience, 
education, criminal record and bankruptcy history (as appropriate). 

(e) Ensure that all material information relevant to a decision on whether or 
not to elect or re-elect a Director will be provided to security holders in 
the Notice of Meeting containing the resolution to elect or re-elect a 
Director, including: 

(i) biographical details (including relevant qualifications and 
experience and skills); 

(ii) details of any other material directorships currently held by the 
candidate; 

(iii) where standing as a Director for the first time, any material 
adverse information revealed by the checks, details of any 
interest, position, association or relationship that might materially 
influence their capacity to be independent and act in the best 
interests of the Company and its shareholders, and a statement 
whether the Board considers the candidate is considered to be 
independent; 

(iv) where standing for re-election as a Director, the term of office 
served by the Director and a statement whether the Board 
considers the candidate is considered to be independent; and 

(v) a statement by the Board whether it supports the election or re-
election of the candidate. 

(f) Ensure that each Director and senior executive is a party to a written 
agreement with the Company which sets out the terms of that Director’s 
or senior executive’s appointment. For these purposes, a senior executive 
is a member of key management personnel (as defined in the 
Corporations Act), other than a Director. 

(g) Prepare and maintain a Board skills matrix setting out the mix of skills and 
diversity that the Board currently has (or is looking to achieve). The 
Company must disclose this matrix in, or in conjunction with, its Annual 
Report. 

(h) Approve and review induction and continuing professional 
development programs and procedures for Directors to ensure that they 
can effectively discharge their responsibilities. 

(i) Assess and consider the time required to be committed by a non-
executive Director to properly fulfil their duty to the Company and advise 
the Board. 

(j) Consider and recommend to the Board candidates for election or re-
election to the Board at each annual shareholders’ meeting. 

(k) Review Directorships in other public companies held by or offered to 
Directors and senior executives of the Company. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 24 

 



(l) Review succession plans for the Board will a view to maintaining an 
appropriate balance of skills and experience on the Board. 

(m) Arrange an annual performance evaluation of the Board, its Committee, 
individual Directors and senior executives as appropriate. 

5. MEETINGS 

(a) The Committee will meet at least once a year and additionally as 
circumstances may require. 

(b) Meetings are called by the Secretary as directed by the Board or at the 
request of the Chairman of the Committee. 

(c) Where deemed appropriate by the Chairman of the Committee, 
meetings and subsequent approvals may be held or concluded by way 
of a circular written resolution or conference call. 

(d) A quorum shall comprise any two members of the Committee. In the 
absence of the Committee Chairman or appointed delegate, the 
members shall elect one of their number as Chairman. 

(e) Decisions will be based on a majority of votes with the Chairman having 
a casting vote. 

(f) The Committee may invite executive management team members or 
other individuals, including external third parties to attend meetings of 
the Committee, as they consider appropriate. 

6. SECRETARY 

(a) The Company Secretary or their nominee shall be the Secretary of the 
Committee and shall attend meetings of the Committee as required. 

(b) The Secretary will be responsible for keeping the minutes of meetings of 
the Committee and circulating them to Committee members and to the 
other members of the Board. 

(c) The Secretary shall distribute supporting papers for each meeting of the 
Committee as far in advance as possible. 

7. RELIANCE ON INFORMATION OR PROFESSIONAL OR EXPERT ADVICE 

Each member of the Committee is entitled to rely on information, or professional 
or expert advice, to the extent permitted by law, given or prepared by: 

(a) an employee of the Group whom the member believes on reasonable 
grounds to be reliable and competent in relation to the matters 
concerned; 

(b) a professional adviser or expert in relation to matters that the member 
believes on reasonable grounds to be within the person’s professional or 
expert competence; or 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 25 

 



(c) another Director or officer of the Group in relation to matters within the 
Director’s or officer’s authority. 

8. ACCESS TO ADVICE 

(a) Members of the Committee have rights of access to the books and 
records of the Company to enable them to discharge their duties as 
Committee members, except where the Board determines that such 
access would be adverse to the Company’s interests. 

(b) The Committee may consult independent experts to assist it in carrying 
out its duties and responsibilities. Any costs incurred as a result of the 
Committee consulting an independent expert will be borne by the 
Company. 

9. REVIEW OF CHARTER 

(a) The Board will conduct an annual review of the membership to ensure 
that the Committee has carried out its functions in an effective manner, 
and will update the Charter as required or as a result of new laws or 
regulations. 

(b) The Charter shall be made available to members on request, to senior 
management, to the external auditor and to other parties as deemed 
appropriate and will be posted to the Company’s website. 

10. REPORTING 

(a) The Committee must report to the Board formally at the next Board 
meeting following from the last Committee meeting on matters relevant 
to the Committee’s role and responsibilities. 

(b) The Committee must brief the Board promptly on all urgent and 
significant matters. 

(c) The Company must disclose the policies and practices regarding the 
nomination of non-executive directors, executive directors and other 
senior executives in, or in conjunction with, the annual report and as 
otherwise required by law.  

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 26 

 



SCHEDULE  6  –  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION POLICY 

The Nomination Committee will arrange a performance evaluation of the Board, its 
Committees, individual Directors and senior executives on an annual basis as appropriate. 
To assist in this process an independent advisor may be used. 

The Nomination Committee will conduct an annual review of the role of the Board, assess 
the performance of the Board over the previous 12 months and examine ways of assisting 
the Board in performing its duties more effectively. 

The review will include: 

(a) comparing the performance of the Board with the requirements of its Charter; 

(b) examination of the Board’s interaction with management; 

(c) the nature of information provided to the Board by management; and 

(d) management’s performance in assisting the Board to meet its objectives. 

A similar review may be conducted for each Committee by the Board with the aim of 
assessing the performance of each Committee and identifying areas where 
improvements can be made. 

The Remuneration Committee will oversee the evaluation of the remuneration of the 
Company’s senior executives. This evaluation must be based on specific criteria, including 
the business performance of the Company and its subsidiaries, whether strategic 
objectives are being achieved and the development of management and personnel. 

The Company must disclose, in relation to each financial year, whether or not the relevant 
annual performance evaluations have been conducted in accordance with the above 
processes.  

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 27 

 



SCHEDULE  7  –  CONTINUOUS DISCLOSURE POLICY 

The Company must comply with continuous disclosure requirements arising from 
legislation and the ASX Listing Rules. 

The general rule, in accordance with ASX Listing Rule 3.1, is that once the Company 
becomes aware of any information concerning it that a reasonable person would expect 
to have a material effect on the price of value of the Company’s securities, the Company 
must immediately disclose that information to the ASX. 

The Company has in place a written policy on information disclosure and relevant 
procedures. 

The focus of these procedures is on continuous disclosure compliance and improving 
access to information for investors. 

The Company Secretary is responsible for: 

(a) overseeing and co-ordinating disclosure of information to the relevant stock 
exchanges and shareholders; and 

(b) providing guidance to Directors and employees on disclosure requirements and 
procedures. 

Price sensitive information is publicly released through ASX before it is disclosed to 
shareholders and market participants. Distribution of other information to shareholders 
and market participants is also managed through disclosure to the ASX. 

All announcements (and media releases) must be: 

(a) prepared in compliance with ASX Listing Rules continuous disclosure 
requirements; 

(b) factual and not omit material information; and  

(c) expressed in a clear and objective manner to allow investors to assess the impact 
of the information when making investment decisions. 

The Company’s protocol in relation to the review and release of ASX announcements 
(and media releases) is as follows: 

(a) All key announcements at the discretion of the Managing Director are to be 
circulated to and reviewed by all members of the Board. 

(b) All members of the Board are required to seek to provide to the Managing 
Director (or in his/her absence, the Company Secretary) with verbal or written 
contribution of each key announcement, prior to its release. 

(c) Any relevant parties named in the announcement should also be given the 
opportunity to review the announcement prior to its release, to confirm all 
information is factually correct. 

(d) The Managing Director (and in his/her absence, the Chairman) is to be given the 
final signoff before release to the ASX of the announcement. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 28 

 



Information is posted on the Company’s website after the ASX confirms an announcement 
has been made, with the aim of making the information readily accessible to the widest 
audience. 

The Company Secretary is to maintain a copy of all announcements released. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 29 

 



SCHEDULE  8  –  R ISK  MANAGEMENT POLICY 

The Board determines the Company’s “risk profile” and is responsible for overseeing and 
approving risk management strategy and policies, internal compliance and internal 
control. 

The Board has delegated to the Audit and Risk Committee responsibility for implementing 
the risk management system. 

The Audit and Risk Committee will submit particular matters to the Board for its approval 
or review. Among other things it will: 

(a) oversee the Company’s risk management systems, practices and procedures to 
ensure effective risk identification and management and compliance with 
internal guidelines and external requirements; 

(b) assist management to determine whether it has any material exposure to 
economic, environmental and/or social sustainability risks (as those terms are 
defined in the ASX Corporate Governance Council's Corporate Governance 
Principles and Recommendations) and, if it does, how it manages, or intends to 
manage, those risks;  

(c) assist management to determine the key risks to the businesses and prioritise work 
to manage those risks; and  

(d) review reports by management on the efficiency and effectiveness of risk 
management and associated internal compliance and control procedures. 

The Company’s process of risk management and internal compliance and control 
includes: 

(a) identifying and measuring risks that might impact upon the achievement of the 
Company’s goals and objectives, and monitoring the environment for emerging 
factors and trends that affect these risks; 

(b) formulating risk management strategies to manage identified risks, and designing 
and implementing appropriate risk management policies and internal controls; 
and 

(c) monitoring the performance of, and improving the effectiveness of, risk 
management systems and internal compliance and controls, including regular 
assessment of the effectiveness of risk management and internal compliance 
and control. 

To this end, comprehensive practises are in place that are directed towards achieving the 
following objectives: 

(a) compliance with applicable laws and regulations: 

(b) preparation of reliable published financial information; and 

(c) implementation of risk transfer strategies where appropriate eg insurance. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 30 

 



The responsibility for undertaking and assessing risk management and internal control 
effectiveness is delegated to management. Management is required to assess risk 
management and associated internal compliance and control procedures and report 
back at each Audit and Risk Committee at least annually. 

The Board will review assessments of the effectiveness of risk management and internal 
compliance and control at least annually.  

The Company must disclose at least annually whether the Board (or a committee of the 
Board) has completed a review of the Company’s risk management framework to satisfy 
itself that it continues to be sound. 

The Company will disclose if it has any material exposure to economic, environmental 
and/or social sustainability risks (as those terms are defined in the ASX Corporate 
Governance Council's Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations) and, if 
it does, how it manages, or intends to manage, those risks. 

 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 31 

 



SCHEDULE  9  –  TRADING POL ICY 

1. INTRODUCTION 

These guidelines set out the policy on the sale and purchase of securities in the 
Company by its Key Management Personnel. 

Key Management Personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility 
for planning, directing and controlling the activities of the entity, directly or 
indirectly, including any Director (whether executive or otherwise) of that entity. 

The Company has determined that its Key Management Personnel are its 
Directors and those employees directly reporting to the Managing Director. 

Key Management Personnel are encouraged to be long-term holders of the 
Company’s securities. However, it is important that care is taken in the timing of 
any purchase or sale of such securities. 

The purpose of these guidelines is to assist Key Management Personnel to avoid 
conduct known as ‘insider trading’. In some respects, the Company’s policy 
extends beyond the strict requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).  

2. WHAT TYPES OF TRANSACTIONS ARE COVERED BY THIS POLICY? 

This policy applies to both the sale and purchase of any securities of the 
Company and its subsidiaries on issue from time to time. 

3. WHAT IS INSIDER TRADING? 

3.1 Prohibition 

Insider trading is a criminal offence. It may also result in civil liability. In broad terms, 
a person will be guilty of insider trading if: 

(a) that person possesses information which is not generally available to the 
market and, if it were generally available to the market, would be likely 
to have a material effect on the price or value of the Company’s 
securities (ie information that is ‘price sensitive’); and 

(b) that person: 

(i) buys or sells securities in the Company; or 

(ii) procures someone else to buy or sell securities in the Company; 
or 

(iii) passes on that information to a third party where that person 
knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the third party would 
be likely to buy or sell the securities or procure someone else to 
buy or sell the securities of the Company. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 32 

 



3.2 Examples 

To illustrate the prohibition described above, the following are possible examples 
of price sensitive information which, if made available to the market, may be likely 
to materially affect the price of the Company’s securities: 

(a) the Company considering a major acquisition; 

(b) the threat of major litigation against the Company; 

(c) the Company’s revenue and profit or loss results materially exceeding (or 
falling short of) the market’s expectations; 

(d) a material change in debt, liquidity or cash flow; 

(e) a significant new development proposal (e.g. new product or 
technology); 

(f) the grant or loss or a major contract; 

(g) a management or business restructuring proposal;  

(h) a share issue proposal; 

(i) an agreement or option to acquire an interest in a mining tenement, or 
to enter into a joint venture or farm-in or farm-out arrangement in relation 
to a mining tenement; and 

(j) significant discoveries, exploration results, or changes in reserve/resource 
estimates from mining tenements in which the Company has an interest. 

3.3 Dealing through third parties 

The insider trading prohibition extends to dealings by individuals through 
nominees, agents or other associates, such as family members, family trusts and 
family companies (referred to as “Associates” in these guidelines). 

3.4 Information however obtained 

It does not matter how or where the person obtains the information – it does not 
have to be obtained from the Company to constitute inside information. 

3.5 Employee share schemes 

The prohibition does not apply to acquisitions of shares or options by employees 
made under employee share or option schemes, nor does it apply to the 
acquisition of shares as a result of the exercise of options under an employee 
option scheme. However, the prohibition does apply to the sale of shares 
acquired under an employee share scheme and also to the sale of shares 
acquired following the exercise of an option granted under an employee option 
scheme. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 33 

 



4. GUIDELINES FOR TRADING IN THE COMPANY’S SECURITIES 

4.1 General rule 

Key Management Personnel must not, except in exceptional circumstances deal 
in securities of the Company during the following periods: 

(a) two weeks prior to, and 48 hours after the release of the Company’s 
Annual Financial Report;  

(b) two weeks prior to, and 48 hours after the release of the Half Year 
Financial Report of the Company; and 

(c) two weeks prior to, and 48 hours after the release of the Company’s 
quarterly reports (if applicable), 

(together the Closed Periods). 

The Company may at its discretion vary this rule in relation to a particular Closed 
Periods by general announcement to all Key Management Personnel either 
before or during the Closed Periods. However, if a Key Management Personnel is 
in possession of price sensitive information which is not generally available to the 
market, then he or she must not deal in the Company’s securities at any time. 

4.2 No short-term trading in the Company’s securities 

Key Management Personnel should never engage in short-term trading of the 
Company’s securities except for the exercise of options where the shares will be 
sold shortly thereafter. 

4.3 Securities in other companies 

Buying and selling securities of other companies with which the Company may 
be dealing is prohibited where an individual possesses information which is not 
generally available to the market and is ‘price sensitive’. For example, where an 
individual is aware that the Company is about to sign a major agreement with 
another company, they should not buy securities in either the Company or the 
other company. 

4.4 Exceptions 

(a) Key Management Personnel may at any time: 

(i) acquire ordinary shares in the Company by conversion of 
securities giving a right of conversion to ordinary shares; 

(ii) acquire Company securities under a bonus issue made to all 
holders of securities of the same class; 

(iii) acquire Company securities under a dividend reinvestment, or 
top-up plan that is available to all holders or securities of the 
same class; 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 34 

 



(iv) acquire, or agree to acquire or exercise options under an 
employee incentive scheme (as that term is defined in the ASX 
Listing Rules); 

(v) withdraw ordinary shares in the Company held on behalf of the 
Key Management Personnel in an employee incentive scheme 
(as that term is defined in the ASX Listing Rules) where the 
withdrawal is permitted by the rules of that scheme;  

(vi) acquire ordinary shares in the Company as a result of the 
exercise of options held under an employee option scheme; 

(vii) transfer securities of the Company already held into a 
superannuation fund or other saving scheme in which the 
restricted person is a beneficiary; 

(viii) make an investment in, or trade in units of, a fund or other 
scheme (other than a scheme only investing in the securities of 
the Company) where the assets of the fund or other scheme are 
invested at the discretion of a third party; 

(ix) where a restricted person is a trustee, trade in the securities of 
the Company by that trust, provided the restricted person is not 
a beneficiary of the trust and any decision to trade during a 
prohibited period is taken by the other trustees or by the 
investment managers independently of the restricted person; 

(x) undertake to accept, or accept, a takeover offer; 

(xi) trade under an offer or invitation made to all or most of the 
security holders, such as a rights issue, a security purchase plan, 
a dividend or distribution reinvestment plan and an equal 
access buy-back, where the plan that determines the timing 
and structure of the offer has been approved by the Board. This 
includes decisions relating to whether or not to take up the 
entitlements and the sale of entitlements required to provide for 
the take up of the balance of entitlements under a 
renounceable pro rata issue; 

(xii) dispose of securities of the Company resulting from a secured 
lender exercising their rights, for example, under a margin 
lending arrangement; 

(xiii) exercise (but not sell securities following exercise) an option or a 
right under an employee incentive scheme, or convert a 
convertible security, where the final date for the exercise of the 
option or right, or the conversion of the security, falls during a 
prohibited period or the Company has had a number of 
consecutive prohibited periods and the restricted person could 
not reasonably have been expected to exercise it at a time 
when free to do so; or 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 35 

 



(xiv) trade under a non-discretionary trading plan for which prior 
written clearance has been provided in accordance with 
procedures set out in this Policy. 

(b) In respect of any share or option plans adopted by the Company, it 
should be noted that it is not permissible to provide the exercise price of 
options by selling the shares acquired on the exercise of these options 
unless the sale of those shares occurs outside the periods specified in 
paragraph 4.1. 

Were this is to occur at a time when the person possessed inside information, then 
the sale of Company securities would be a breach of insider trading laws, even 
though the person’s decision to sell was not influenced by the inside information 
that the person possessed and the person may not have made a profit on the 
sale. Where Company securities are provided to a lender as security by way of 
mortgage or charge, a sale that occurs under that mortgage or charge as a 
consequence of default would not breach insider trading laws. 

4.5 Notification of periods when Key Management Personnel are not permitted to 
trade 

The Company Secretary will endeavour to notify all Key Management Personnel 
of the times when they are not permitted to buy or sell the Company’s securities 
as set out in paragraph 4.1. 

5. APPROVAL AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Approval requirements 

(a) Any Key Management Personnel (other than the Chairman) wishing to 
buy, sell or exercise rights in relation to the Company’s securities must 
obtain the prior written approval of the Chairman or the Board before 
doing so. 

(b) If the Chairman wishes to buy, sell or exercise rights in relation to the 
Company’s securities, the Chairman must obtain the prior approval of 
the Board before doing so. 

5.2 Approvals to buy or sell securities  

(a) All requests to buy or sell securities as referred to in paragraph 5.1 must 
include the intended volume of securities to be purchased or sold and 
an estimated time frame for the sale or purchase. 

(b) Copies of written approvals must be forwarded to the Company 
Secretary prior to the approved purchase or sale transaction. 

5.3 Notification 

Subsequent to approval obtained in accordance with paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2, 
any Key Management Personnel who (or through his or her Associates) buys, sells, 
or exercises rights in relation to Company securities must notify the Company 
Secretary in writing of the details of the transaction within two (2) business days of 
the transaction occurring. This notification obligation operates at all times and 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 36 

 



includes applications for acquisitions of shares or options by employees made 
under employee share or option schemes and also applies to the acquisition of 
shares as a result of the exercise of options under an employee option scheme. 

5.4 Key Management Personnel sales of securities  

Key Management Personnel need to be mindful of the market perception 
associated with any sale of Company securities and possibly the ability of the 
market to absorb the volume of shares being sold. With this in mind, the 
management of the sale of any significant volume of Company securities (ie a 
volume that would represent a volume in excess of 10% of the total securities held 
by the seller prior to the sale, or a volume to be sold that would be in excess of 
10% of the average daily traded volume of the shares of the Company on the 
ASX for the preceding 20 trading days) by a Key Management Personnel needs 
to be discussed with the Board and the Company’s legal advisers prior to the 
execution of any sale. These discussions need to be documented in the form of a 
file note, to be retained by the Company Secretary. 

5.5 Exemption from Closed Periods restrictions due to exceptional circumstance 

Key Management Personnel who are not in possession of inside information in 
relation to the Company, may be given prior written clearance by the Managing 
Director (or in the case of the Managing Director by all other members of the 
Board) to sell or otherwise dispose of Company securities in a Closed Period where 
the person is in severe financial hardship or where there are exceptional 
circumstances as set out in this policy. 

5.6 Severe financial hardship or exceptional circumstances 

The determination of whether a Key Management Personnel is in severe financial 
hardship will be made by the Managing Director (or in the case of the Managing 
Director by all other members of the Board).  

A financial hardship or exceptional circumstances determination can only be 
made by examining all of the facts and if necessary obtaining independent 
verification of the facts from banks, accountants or other like institutions. 

5.7 Financial hardship 

Key Management Personnel may be in severe financial hardship if they have a 
pressing financial commitment that cannot be satisfied other than by selling the 
securities of the Company.  

In the interests of an expedient and informed determination by the Managing 
Director (or all other members of the Board as the context requires), any 
application for an exemption allowing the sale of Company securities in a Closed 
Period based on financial hardship must be made in writing stating all of the facts 
and be accompanied by copies of relevant supporting documentation, 
including contact details of the person’s accountant, bank and other such 
independent institutions (where applicable).  

Any exemption, if issued, will be in writing and shall contain a specified time period 
during which the sale of securities can be made. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 37 

 



5.8 Exceptional circumstances 

Exceptional circumstances may apply to the disposal of Company securities by 
a Key Management Personnel if the person is required by a court order, a court 
enforceable undertaking for example in a bona fide family settlement, to transfer 
or sell securities of the Company, or there is some other overriding legal or 
regulatory requirement to do so. 

Any application for an exemption allowing the sale of Company securities in a 
Closed Period based on exceptional circumstances must be made in writing and 
be accompanied by relevant court and/or supporting legal documentation 
(where applicable).  

Any exemption, if issued, will be in writing and shall contain a specified time period 
during which the sale of securities can be made. 

6. ASX NOTIFICATION FOR DIRECTORS 

The ASX Listing Rules require the Company to notify the ASX within 5 business days 
after any dealing in securities of the Company (either personally or through an 
Associate) which results in a change in the relevant interests of a Director in the 
securities of the Company. The Company has made arrangements with each 
Director to ensure that the Director promptly discloses to the Company Secretary 
all the information required by the ASX. 

7. EFFECT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THIS POLICY 

Compliance with these guidelines for trading in the Company’s securities does 
not absolve that individual from complying with the law, which must be the 
overriding consideration when trading in the Company’s securities. 

 

 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 38 

 



SCHEDULE  10  –  D IVERS I TY  POLICY 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The Company and all its related bodies corporate are committed to workplace 
diversity.  

The Company recognises the benefits arising from employee and Board diversity, 
including a broader pool of high quality employees, improving employee 
retention, accessing different perspectives and ideas and benefiting from all 
available talent. 

Diversity includes, but is not limited to, gender, age, ethnicity and cultural 
background. 

To the extent practicable, the Company will consider the recommendations and 
guidance provided in the ASX Corporate Governance Council's Corporate 
Governance Principles and Recommendations where appropriate to the 
Company. 

The Diversity Policy does not form part of an employee's contract of employment 
with the Company, nor gives rise to contractual obligations. However, to the 
extent that the Diversity Policy requires an employee to do or refrain from doing 
something and at all times subject to legal obligations, the Diversity Policy forms 
a direction of the Company with which an employee is expected to comply. 

2. OBJECTIVES 

The Diversity Policy provides a framework for the Company to achieve: 

(a) a diverse and skilled workforce, leading to continuous improvement in 
service delivery and achievement of corporate goals; 

(b) a workplace culture characterised by inclusive practices and behaviours 
for the benefit of all staff; 

(c) improved employment and career development opportunities for 
women; 

(d) a work environment that values and utilises the contributions of 
employees with diverse backgrounds, experiences and perspectives 
through improved awareness of the benefits of workforce diversity and 
successful management of diversity; and 

(e) awareness in all staff of their rights and responsibilities with regards to 
fairness, equity and respect for all aspects of diversity, 

(collectively, the Objectives). 

The Diversity Policy does not impose on the Company, its directors, officers, agents 
or employee any obligation to engage in, or justification for engaging in, any 
conduct which is illegal or contrary to any anti-discrimination or equal 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 39 

 



employment opportunity legislation or laws in any State or Territory of Australia or 
of any foreign jurisdiction. 

3. RESPONSIBILITIES 

3.1 The Board's commitment 

The Board is committed to workplace diversity and supports representation of 
women at the senior level of the Company and on the Board where appropriate. 

The Board is responsible for developing measurable objectives and strategies to 
meet the objectives of the Diversity Policy (Measurable Objectives) and 
monitoring the progress of the Measurable Objectives through the monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting mechanisms listed below. The Board shall annually 
assess any Measurable Objectives (if any), and the Company’s progress towards 
achieving them. 

The Board may also set Measurable Objectives for achieving gender diversity and 
monitor their achievement. 

The Board will consider conducting all Board appointment processes in a manner 
that promotes gender diversity, including establishing a structured approach for 
identifying a pool of candidates, using external experts where necessary. 

3.2 Strategies 

The Company's diversity strategies may include: 

(a) recruiting from a diverse pool of candidates for all positions, including 
senior management and the Board; 

(b) reviewing succession plans to ensure an appropriate focus on diversity; 

(c) identifying specific factors to take account of in recruitment and 
selection processes to encourage diversity; 

(d) developing programs to develop a broader pool of skilled and 
experienced senior management and Board candidates, including, 
workplace development programs, mentoring programs and targeted 
training and development; 

(e) developing a culture which takes account of domestic responsibilities of 
employees; and 

(f) any other strategies the Board develops from time to time. 

4. MONITORING AND EVALUATION  

The Chairman will monitor the scope and currency of this policy. 

The Company is responsible for implementing, monitoring and reporting on the 
Measurable Objectives. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 40 

 



Measurable Objectives (if any) as set by the Board will be included in the annual 
key performance indicators for the Chief Executive Officer/Managing Director 
and senior executives. 

In addition, the Board will review progress against the Measurable Objectives (if 
any) as a key performance indicator in its annual performance assessment. 

5. REPORTING 

The Company will disclose, for each financial year: 

(a) any Measurable Objectives set by the Board; 

(b) progress against these Measurable Objectives; and 

(c) either:  

(i) the respective proportions of men and women on the Board, in 
senior executive positions (including how the Company has 
defined “senior executive” for these purposes) and across the 
whole Company; or 

(ii) if the entity is a “relevant employer” under the Workplace 
Gender Equality Act, the entity’s most recent “Gender Equality 
Indicators”, as defined in the Workplace Gender Equality Act. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 41 

 



SCHEDULE  11  –  SHAREHOLDER  COMMUNICATIONS S TRATEGY 

The Board of the Company aims to ensure that the shareholders are informed of all major 
developments affecting the Company’s state of affairs. 

Information is communicated to shareholders through: 

1. the Annual Report delivered by post or via email (if requested by the shareholder) 
and which is also released to Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) and placed 
on the Company’s website; 

2. the half yearly report which is released to ASX and also placed on the Company’s 
website; 

3. the quarterly reports which are released to ASX and also placed on the 
Company’s website; 

4. disclosures and announcements made to the ASX copies of which are placed on 
the Company’s website; 

5. notices and explanatory statements of Annual General Meetings (AGM) and 
General Meetings (GM) copies of which are released to ASX and placed on the 
Company’s website; 

6. the Chairman’s address and the Managing Director’s address made at the AGMs 
and the GMs, copies of which are released to ASX and placed on the Company’s 
website; 

7. the Company’s website on which the Company posts all announcements which 
it makes to the ASX; and 

8. the auditor’s lead engagement partner being present at the AGM to answer 
questions from shareholders about the conduct of the audit and the preparation 
and content of the auditor’s report. 

As part of the Company’s developing investor relations program, Shareholders can 
register with the Company to receive email notifications of when an announcement is 
made by the Company to the ASX, including the release of the Annual Report, half yearly 
reports and quarterly reports. Links are made available to the Company’s website on 
which all information provided to the ASX is immediately posted. 

Shareholders are encouraged to participate at all GMs and AGMs of the Company. Upon 
the despatch of any notice of meeting to Shareholders, the Company Secretary shall send 
out material with that notice of meeting stating that all Shareholders are encouraged to 
participate at the meeting. 

Historical Annual Reports of the Company are provided on the Company’s website. 

Shareholders queries should be referred to the Company Secretary in the first instance. 

  

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 42 

 



SCHEDULE  12  –  WHISTLEBLOWER POL ICY 

1. Introduction 
(a) The Company is committed to conduct its business activities in compliance with 

applicable laws, rules and regulations. All directors, senior executives and 
employees are dedicated to high ethical standards and support the Company’s 
commitment to compliance with these standards.  

(b) This policy describes the safeguards we have in place so you can confidently speak 
up without fearing repercussions. 

(c) You may also have rights under the Corporations Act and the Taxation 
Administration Act.  

2. Purpose 
(a) The aim of this policy is to monitor and review arrangements employees of the 

Company and other interested parties can use, in confidence, to raise concerns 
about possible improprieties in financial reporting, internal control or other 
matters including but not limited to administration of the whistle-blower policy 
adopted by the Company, and to review and make recommendations to the Board 
as appropriate with consultation with the general counsel on the amendments or 
changes to such policies and arrangements (Purpose).  

(b) To achieve the Purpose, the Company endeavours to increase the awareness of 
maintaining good corporate governance practices and have proper arrangements 
in place:  
(i) to provide an employee with a supportive working environment in which 

he or she feels able to raise issues of legitimate concern to them and to 
the Company; 

(ii) which can be used by an employee and other interested parties, in 
confidence, to raise concerns about any unacceptable conduct.  This may 
include a provision of a disclosure line; 

(iii) to protect people who report unacceptable conduct in good faith;  
(iv) to allow fair and independent investigation of the matters reported and 

to ensure appropriate follow-up actions; and 
(v) to allow the detection of unacceptable conduct and addressing them. 

3. Who the policy applies to 
This policy applies to the following persons:  
(a) an officer or employee (e.g. current and former employees whether permanent, 

part-time, fixed-term or temporary, interns, secondees, managers, and directors); 
(b) a supplier of services or goods to the Company (whether paid or unpaid) including 

their employees; 
(c) an associated of the Company; and 
(d) a relative, dependant or spouse of an individual referred to above,  
each an Eligible Whistle-blower (also referred to as “you or yours”).  

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 43 

 



4. Matters the policy applies to 
(a) A Disclosable Matter is information that a discloser has reasonable grounds to 

suspect concerns misconduct, or an improper state of affairs or circumstances in 
relation to the Company. The Company considers any conduct which:  
(i) is dishonest, fraudulent or corrupt such as falsification of records, 

contracts or data, adopting questionable or improper accounting 
practices or bribery; 

(ii) Is illegal, such as theft, violence (actual or threatened), harassment or 
intimidation, criminal damage to property or other breaches of any law 
or regulatory requirements in Australia or any other jurisdictions in which 
the Company operates; 

(iii) is unethical, such as discrimination, oppression, actions causing 
substantial damage to the environment or acts in breach of the Code of 
Conduct; 

(iv) is potentially damaging to an employee or person, such as unsafe work 
practices or substantial wasting of company resources; 

(v) may cause financial loss to the Company or damage its reputation or be 
otherwise detrimental to the Company’s interests; or 

(vi) involves any other kind of serious malpractice or impropriety, 
to be Disclosable Matters. 

(b) This policy does not apply to certain types of matter such as personal work-related 
grievances unless:  
(i) it includes information about misconduct, or information about 

misconduct includes or is accompanied by a personal work-related 
grievance; 

(ii) the Company has breached employment or other laws punishable by 
imprisonment for a period of 12 months or more, engage in conduct that 
represents a danger to the public or the disclosure relates to information 
that suggests misconduct beyond your personal circumstances; 

(iii) you are threatened with detriment for making a disclosure; 
(iv) you seek legal advice or legal representation about the operation of the 

whistle-blower protections under the Corporations Act.  
5. Who can receive a disclosure 

(a) To qualify for protection under the Corporations Act, you must make a report on a 
Disclosable Matter to any of the following persons (each an Eligible Recipient): 

Eligible internal Directors 
recipient Company Secretary 
Eligible external Company’s external auditors 
recipient Legal practitioner for the purposes of obtaining legal advice 

or legal representation about the operation of the whistle-
blower provisions in the Corporations Act. 
Regulatory bodies such as ASIC, APRA or other 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 44 

 



Commonwealth body prescribed under the regulations 
(Regulatory Bodies). 

(b) Disclosures to a legal practitioner for the purposes of obtaining legal advice or legal 
representation in relation to the operation of the whistleblower provisions of the 
Corporations Act are protected, even where the legal practitioner has concluded 
that a disclosure does not relate to a Disclosable Matter. 

(c) For emergency and public interest disclosures, you may also report a Disclosable 
Matter to journalists and members of the Commonwealth, State or Territory 
parliaments.  

(d) It is important that you understand the criteria for making a public interest or 
emergency disclosure, including: 
(i) the disclosure must have previously been made to a Regulatory Body; 
(ii) written notice provided to the Regulatory Body to which the disclosure 

was made; and 
(iii) in the case of a public interest disclosure, at least 90 days must have 

passed since the previous disclosure.  
(e) You should contact an independent legal adviser before making a public interest 

disclosure or an emergency disclosure.  
6. How to make a disclosure 

(a) You can:  
(i) report a Disclosable Matter directly to an Eligible Recipient. All such 

disclosures, whether provided anonymously or with your identity, are 
protected under the Corporations Act; 

(ii) choose to remain anonymous while making a disclosure, over the curse 
of the investigation and after the investigation is finalised; 

(iii) refuse to answer questions that they feel could review their identity at 
any time, including during follow-up conversations.  

(b) If you wish to remain anonymous, you should maintain ongoing two-way 
communication with the Company, so the Company can follow-up questions or 
provide feedback.  

7. Legal protections for disclosers 
(a) You will be protected from:  

(i) any civil, criminal or administrative liability for making the report of a 
Disclosable Matter. However, this does not prevent you from being 
subject to civil, criminal or administrative liability for your conduct 
reviewed in a report; 

(ii) the Company exercising any contractual right, or seeking any contractual 
remedy against them on the basis that you have made the report; or 

(iii) being subject to any form of detriment or reprisal for making the report.  
(b) The Company is legally obliged to protect the confidentiality of your identity. 

Subject to limited exceptions, it is illegal for a person to identify an Eligible 
Whistleblower or disclose information that is likely to lead to the identification of 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 45 

 



the Eligible Whistleblower. A contravention of this requirement may lead to 
disciplinary action, including termination of employment, as well as imprisonment 
and fines.  

8. Identity protection 
(a) Your identity will not be disclosed unless:  

(i) to ASIC, APRA, or a member of the Australian Federal Police; 
(ii) to a legal practitioner (for the purpose of obtaining legal advice or legal 

representation about the whistleblower provisions in the Corporations 
Act); 

(iii) to a person or body prescribed by regulations; or 
(iv) with your consent. 

(b) Information you provide can be disclosed with or without your consent if:  
(i) the information does not include your identity; 
(ii) the Company has taken all reasonable steps to reduce the risk that you 

will be identified from the information; and 
(iii) it is reasonably necessary for investigating the issues raised in the 

disclosure. 
(c) Information regarding the reported matter will be securely stored and only 

disclosed to the relevant people as required or allowed by this policy and the law. 
Any inappropriate disclosure of information may lead to disciplinary action, 
including termination of employment, as well as imprisonment and fines. Each 
person involved in handling and investigating a disclosure will be reminded of their 
obligations as well as consequences for breach. 

(d) If your identity is disclosed in circumstances not covered in (a) and (b) above, you 
can lodge a complaint with an Eligible Recipient about a breach of confidentiality. 
You may also lodge a complaint with a regulator, such as ASIC, APRA or the ATO, for 
investigation.  

9. Protection from detrimental acts or omissions 
(a) Eligible Whistleblowers are protected from detrimental conduct or the treat of 

detrimental conduct against them as a result of making a disclosure under this 
policy. A threat may be expected or implied or conditional or unconditional.  

(b) Examples of detrimental conduct include:  
(i) dismissal of an employee; 
(ii) injury of an employee in his or her employment; 
(iii) alteration of an employee’s position or duties to his or her disadvantage; 
(iv) discrimination between an employee and other employees of the same 

employer; 
(v) harassment or intimidation of a person; 
(vi) harm or injury to a person, including psychological harm; 
(vii) damage to a person’s property; 
(viii) damage to a person’s reputation; 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 46 

 



(ix) damage to a person’s business or financial position; or  
(x) any other damage to a person.  

10. Handling and investigating a disclosure 
(a) A person wanting to report a matter should do their best to ensure that the report 

is:  
(i) factually accurate 
(ii) complete from first-hand knowledge, and  
(iii) made in good faith. 
It is not the reporting person’s job to investigate or prove a case of Disclosable 
Matter.  

(b) Upon receiving a complaint, the Eligible Recipient will determine who will 
investigate the matter. They cannot appoint anyone implicated directly or indirectly 
in the complaint.  

(c) The person appointed to investigate the report will be required to follow normal 
Company procedures for handling a complaint or disciplinary issue. 

(d) The investigation must be conducted:  
(i) as soon as possible after the complaint is reported; 
(ii) through the best endeavours of the Eligible Recipient, in a timely, 

thorough, confidential, objective and fair manner; 
(iii) as is reasonably and appropriate having regard to the nature of the 

unacceptable  conduct and all of the circumstances.  
(e) The Company will ensure the fair treatment of its staff who are mentioned in a 

disclosure that qualifies for protection, including those who are subject to a 
disclosure.  

(f) As part of its investigation process, where the Corporations Act applies and 
information is disclosed by a person in accordance with these criteria, the person 
receiving the information may not tell anyone other than ASIC, APRA or the 
Australian Federal Police any of: 
(i) the information is disclosed; 
(ii) the identity of the person making the disclosure; or  
(iii) any information which will enable the identification of the person making 

the disclosure;  
unless the person consents to that disclosure.  

(g) At the end of the investigation, the investigating person must report their findings 
to the Board who will determine the appropriate response. 

(h) Responses to investigations will include rectifying any unacceptable conduct and 
taking any action required to prevent any future occurrences of the same or similar 
conduct. 

(i) Where allegations of unacceptable conduct made against another person cannot 
be substantiated, that person will be advised accordingly and will be entitled to 
continue in their role as if the allegations had not been made. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 47 

 



(j) Once the investigation is completed, a verbal report will be made to the person 
who reported the unacceptable conduct. This report will explain the findings and 
actions taken to the fullest extent possible within commercial, legal and 
confidentiality constraints.  If the report made was anonymous, alternative 
arrangements, if possible, will be made for providing a verbal report of the outcome 
of the investigation to that person. 

(k) If the person making the complaint is dissatisfied with the outcome of the 
investigation, they can escalate the matter to ASIC, APRA, the ATO or the Federal 
Police. 

11. Compensation and other remedies 
(a) You can seek compensation and other remedies through the courts if:  

(i) you suffer loss, damage or injury because of a disclosure; and 
(ii) the Company fails to take reasonable precautions and exercise due 

diligence to prevent the detrimental conduct.  
(b) If you consider that you have suffered detrimental conduct which his prohibited by 

the law, then you should seek independent legal advice. 
12. Training 

(a) The Company’s expectation in relation to the reporting of improper conduct are 
outlined as part of the new employee induction program and as part of ongoing 
training and awareness program. 

(b) The Company will also provide training to the Authorised Officers to ensure they 
follow this policy in responding to complaints.  

13. Implementation of this policy 
(a) This policy will be made available on the Company’s website and kept up to date. 
(b) The policy will be reviewed by the Board as required and may be amended by 

resolution of the Board.  
(c) The Board will use reports provided under this policy to monitor and review 

regularly the effectiveness of the protection programme described in this policy. 

Ozz Resources Limited  Corporate Governance Plan 2021 48 

 



 

ANNEXURE A  –  DEF IN IT ION OF INDEPENDENCE 

Examples of interests, positions, associations and relationships that might cause doubts 
about the independence of a director include if the director: 

(a) is, or has been, employed in an executive capacity by the Company or any of its 
child entities and there has not been a period of at least three years between 
ceasing such employment and serving on the board; 

(b) is, or has within the last three years been, a partner, director or senior employee 
of a provider of material professional services or a material consultant to the 
Company or any of its child entities; 

(c) is, or has been within the last three years, in a material business relationship (eg as 
a supplier or customer) with the Company or any of its child entities, or an officer 
of, or otherwise associated with, someone with such a relationship; 

(d) is a substantial security holder of the Company or an officer of, or otherwise 
associated with, a substantial security holder of the Company; 

(e) has a material contractual relationship with the Company or its child entities other 
than as a director; 

(f) has close family ties with any person who falls within any of the categories 
described above; or 

(g) has been a director of the Company for such a period that his or her 
independence may have been compromised. 

In each case, the materiality of the interest, position, association or relationship needs to 
be assessed to determine whether it might interfere, or might reasonably be seen to 
interfere, with the director’s capacity to bring an independent judgement to bear on issues 
before the Board and to act in the best interests of the Company and its security holders 
generally. 

 

4427-01/1642368_1  1