1. Lending and Credit Documents: (Documents related to borrowing and lending money)
    1.1 Lending and Credit Documents Categories:
        (i) Loan Agreements: Formal contracts outlining the terms and conditions of a loan between a lender and a borrower (including personal loans, commercial loans, syndicated loans).
        (ii) Mortgage Agreements: Legal documents that create a lien on real property as security for a loan.
        (iii) Credit Card Agreements: Contracts between a financial institution and a cardholder governing the use of a credit card.
        (iv) Promissory Notes: Written promises to repay a specific sum of money with interest within a specified timeframe.
        (v) Guarantees: Agreements where one party promises to pay the debt of another if they default.
        (vi) Security Agreements: Contracts that create a security interest in specific property to secure the repayment of a loan.

2. Investment and Securities Documents: (Documents related to investing in financial instruments)
    2.1 Investment and Securities Documents Categories:
        (i) Subscription Agreements (Securities): Agreements to purchase shares or other securities in a company or fund.
        (ii) Prospectuses: Documents providing detailed information about a company or investment fund offering securities to the public.
        (iii) Investment Management Agreements: Contracts between an investor and a financial institution outlining the terms for managing the investor's assets.
        (iv) Brokerage Agreements: Contracts between an investor and a brokerage firm allowing the firm to execute trades on the investor's behalf.
        (v) Underwriting Agreements: Contracts between an issuer of securities and an underwriter who agrees to sell the securities to the public.

3. Banking Operation Documents: (Documents related to the day-to-day operations of banks)
    3.1 Banking Operation Documents Categories:
        (i) Account Opening Forms: Applications and agreements required to open various types of bank accounts (e.g., savings, checking, current).
        (ii) Deposit Slips: Forms used to record the details of funds deposited into a bank account.
        (iii) Withdrawal Forms: Forms used to request the withdrawal of funds from a bank account.
        (iv) Bank Guarantees: Promises by a bank to pay a certain sum to a beneficiary if a third party fails to fulfill their obligation.
        (v) Letters of Credit: Financial instruments issued by a bank on behalf of a buyer, guaranteeing payment to a seller upon fulfillment of certain conditions.

4. Financial Regulatory Compliance Documents: (Documents related to laws and regulations governing the finance and banking sector)
    4.1 Financial Regulatory Compliance Documents Categories:
        (i) Compliance Policies (e.g., Anti-Money Laundering (AML), Know Your Customer (KYC)): Internal policies and procedures designed to comply with financial regulations.
        (ii) Regulatory Filings: Reports and documents submitted to financial regulatory authorities as required by law.
        (iii) Audit Reports (Financial Regulatory Focus): Reports assessing a financial institution's compliance with relevant financial regulations.
        (iv) Data Privacy Policies (for Financial Data): Policies outlining how a financial institution collects, uses, and protects customer financial data in compliance with privacy laws.

5. Payment System Documents: (Documents related to the systems and processes for making payments)
    5.1 Payment System Documents Categories:
        (i) Payment Gateway Agreements: Contracts between a merchant and a payment gateway service provider to process online payments.
        (ii) Merchant Agreements: Contracts between a merchant and a bank or payment processor allowing the merchant to accept credit and debit card payments.
        (iii) Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) Agreements: Agreements governing the electronic transfer of funds between accounts.
        (iv) Letters of Undertaking for Payments: Formal promises to make a payment under specific conditions.
        
 LD/ 2172
(To be stamped as an agreement)
PERSONAL LOAN AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
______Insert the name of the Borrower_______
AND
THE SOUTH INDIAN BANK LTD
Amount Rs.
This forms part of the PERSONAL LOAN Agreement executed between______Insert the name
of the Borrowers______andThe South Indian Bank Ltd.dated ___________
Borrower(s) The South Indian Bank Ltd.
LD/ 2172
THIS AGREEMENT is made at the place and date as specified in Schedule I (a) BETWEEN such
persons, whose name(s) and address(es) are as specified in Schedule I (b) (hereinafter referred to
as the “Borrowers” which expression shall unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof
include its successors and assigns and all persons deriving/ claiming title there under) AND The
South Indian Bank Ltd, a banking company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1913 and
having its Registered Office at “SIB House”, T.B. Road, Mission Quarters, Thrissur and one of its
Branch Offices at the place specified in Schedule I (c) (hereinafter referred to as the “Bank” which
expression shall unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof include its successors and
assigns).
WHEREAS the Borrower/s has applied to the bank for a loan/ advance of the amount more fully
specified under Schedule 1 (d) of this agreement for the purpose stated under Schedule I (e) of
this Agreement.
AND WHEREAS the bank agreed to advance/already advanced such loan upon the terms set forth
in these presents and in other loan/security documents.
NOW IT IS HEREBY IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY AGREED, DECLARED,
RECORDED AND CONFIRMED AS FOLLOWS:-
In consideration of the Bank granting/ agreeing to grant the loan more particularly described in
schedule I (d) of this Agreement, it is irrevocably and unconditionally agreed, declared, recorded
and confirmed as follows:
ARTICLE I
TERMS OF THE FACILITY
1.1 Construction of the Agreement
a. The preamble portion of this agreement shall be deemed to be an integral part of this
agreement.
b. The terms, conditions, covenants etc. contained in this agreement shall apply, subsist and be
operative in respect of the credit facilities granted or to be granted by the Bank and this
agreement shall be construed and read as part and parcel of documents/agreements executed/to
be executed by the Borrower(s) in favour of the Bank.
c. The Loan Application shall be deemed to constitute the basis of this agreement and of the loan
advanced or to be advanced by the Bank hereunder
d. The Borrower(s) agree and understand that whenever the context requires, singular term shall
include plural and plural term shall include singular.
1.2 Borrower’s Warranty, Undertaking & Declaration
a. The borrower hereby warrants the correctness of each and every one of the statement and
particulars therein contained and undertakes to carry out the proposals therein set forth.
b. The Borrower/s hereby agrees that the said advance shall be governed by the terms and
conditions contained herein as well as those embodied in the loan sanction letter, Instrument of
Hypothecation, Deed of Guarantee, and other loan and/or security documents except in so far as
LD/ 2172
the loan/security documents may expressly or by necessary implication be modified by these
presents.
c. The Borrower/s agrees and undertakes that the said advance shall be utilised exclusively for the
purpose set forth in the Borrower's proposal and for no other purpose.
d. The Borrower/s agrees and undertakes to notify the bank in writing of any circumstances
affecting the correctness of any particulars set forth in the Borrowers proposal immediately after
the occurrence of any such circumstances.
e. The Borrower agrees that where Bank has made payment direct to the Supplier of goods along
with the margin contributed by the Borrower, the Borrower shall ensure that goods are delivered
promptly and in good condition and the Borrower shall furnish copy of necessary receipts, proof
of delivery etc. to the Bank within one week from the date of disbursement.
f. The Borrower shall upon request of the Bank, allow the Bank and any nominee, servant or agent
of the Bank to inspect the Borrower's premises and plant & machinery, vehicles and other assets
and the Borrower's books of accounts for ensuring that the Borrower has duly complied with the
terms of the advance.
g. The Borrower will furnish the Bank with all such information as the Bank may reasonably require
for the Bank's satisfaction as due compliance with the terms of the advance and all such periodical
reports and information at such times, in such form and containing such particulars as the Bank
may call for, for the purpose of ascertaining the results of the utilisation of the said advance.
h. That the Borrower mutually agrees that each one or any of them are authorized and empowered
by the others to appoint and acknowledge the Borrower‟s individual and collective liability to the
Bank by any payment into the account or by way of express writing in any manner or otherwise
and any such admission and acknowledgment of the liability by one or more of them shall be
construed and deemed to have been made on behalf of each and all of them jointly and severally.
i. The Borrower hereby confirm that Borrower has no objection to the bank giving a separate
mandate to Borrower‟s auditors for issue of certificate regarding diversion/siphoning off funds
borrowed from the bank.
1.2 Other General Terms
a. During the currency of the credit facility, the Borrower shall not without obtaining the prior
consent in writing of the Bank declare any dividend on its share capital, if it fails to meet its
obligations to pay the interest and/or commission and/or instalments or instruments and/or other
moneys payable to the Bank, so long as it is in such default.
b. During the currency of the said credit facility, the Borrower shall not, without the prior
permission in writing of the Bank-
i) Effect any change in the Borrower‟s capital structure;
ii) Formulate any Scheme of Amalgamation or Reconstruction;
iii) Implement any Scheme of Expansion/Diversification/Modernisation other than incurring
routine capital expenditure;
iv) Make any corporate investments or investment by way of share capital or debentures or
lend or advance funds to or place deposits with, any other concern except give normal trade
credits or place on security deposits in the normal course of business or make advances to
LD/ 2172
employees, provided that the Borrower may make such investments by way of deposits or
advances that are required statutorily to be made as per the existing laws of the country or the
rules or regulations or guidelines issued from time to time by the Authorities concerned.
v) Undertake guarantee obligation on behalf of any third party or any other company/firm
etc.
c. The Borrower agrees that the moneys brought in by the principal
shareholders/directors/depositors/other associate firms/ group companies for financing the needs
of the Borrower will not be allowed to be withdrawn, during the currency of the said credit facility,
without the permission of the Bank.
d. The Borrower agrees that it will maintain adequate Books of Accounts which would correctly
reflect its financial position and scale of operations and would not radically change the Accounting
System without prior consent of the Bank.
e. The Borrower hereby undertake not to induct a person who is a director on the board of a
company which has been identified as a willful defaulter and in case such a person is identified on
a later date by the bank or Reserve Bank of India the Borrower shall remove him/her from the
board immediately.
f. Save and except to the extent already disclosed in writing by the Borrower/s to the Bank, the
Borrower/s hereby warrants and undertakes as follows:
(i) The Borrower have obtained all necessary statutory permission/sanction to avail the loan from
the Bank and the executants of the documents are authorised to sign and execute loan documents
and do all necessary things to avail the loan.
(ii) There are no mortgages, charges, lispendens or liens or other encumbrances or any rights of
way, light or water or other easements or right of support on the whole or any part of the
specified assets of the Borrower, except to the extent disclosed to the Bank.
(iii) The Borrower are not a party to litigation of a material character and that the Borrower are
not aware of any facts likely to give rise to such litigation or to material claims against the
Borrower .
(iv) The Borrower have disclosed all facts relating to its properties to the Bank.
(v) The Borrower agrees to furnish copy of Annual Financial Statements and Budget Estimates
immediately after they are ready.
g. The Borrower shall carry on the business efficiently, properly and profitably and such business
shall be continued to such manufacturing and/or trading activity as have been notified to the Bank
and for which the Bank has sanctioned or agreed to sanction the credit facility and shall keep all
the licenses, leases, contracts, engagements essential for carrying on the manufacturing and/or
trading activity, renewed from time to time and shall not allow any interruptions or disturbances to
happen to the business.
h. The Borrower shall maintain proper books of accounts and such other registers, books,
documents, relating to the business as may be statutorily required or as may be required by the
Bank or as may be necessary and/or generally kept in the business of the kind carried on by the
Borrower and shall get the accounts, books duly audited. The Borrower shall, if so required by the
Bank, allow the Bank to inspect such books duly audited.
i. The Borrower shall submit to the Bank periodically as required by the Bank copies of the Balance
LD/ 2172
Sheet and Profit and Loss Account duly audited and also furnish required statements, reports,
returns, certificates and information and will also execute all documents, and provide other
collateral and do all acts and things which the Bank may require to give effect to any of the terms
and conditions set out herein.
1.3 Disbursal of the facility
a. The loan will be disbursed to the borrower in one or more instalment(s) as may be required by
the borrower.
b. The disbursement may be direct to the supplier or by credit to Savings Bank or Current Account
of the Borrower, depending upon the purpose for which the loan is sanctioned.
c. The borrower shall give at least three clear days prior notice of drawal of any instalment of the
loan which advise may be waived by the Bank at its option.
d. In the case of joint borrowing by more than one person, the person specified under Schedule I
(f) of this agreement shall draw the amount in stages as stipulated.
ARTICLE II
REPAYMENT OF LOAN, INTEREST, OTHER CHARGES & EVENT OF DEFAULT
2.1 Repayment of loan
a. The Borrower agrees to repay the loan amount together with interest in the period specified in
Schedule II (a) of this agreement in equated monthly instalments (EMI) stated in Schedule II (b) of
this agreement.
b. The first of such instalment shall be paid on or before the date specified under Schedule II (c) of
this Agreement and subsequent instalments on or before the same day of each month thereafter,
till complete repayment.
2.2 Interest
a) The Borrower agrees to pay interest at the rate on the rests specified under schedule II (d) of
this agreement, with the rests mentioned therein. The Borrower understands that the term “MCLR”
means Marginal Cost of Funds based lending rate, which is a tenure linked benchmark, arrived
based on the corresponding tenure of a particular advance/ facility.
The actual lending rate shall be determined by adding the components of Spread to MCLR (of
appropriate tenure). MCLR of different tenures shall be reviewed and published by the Bank on the
1st day of every month. The interest rate in a particular loan account will be changed only on the
Reset date/ period, irrespective of tenure of MCLR or interim changes in the rates of MCLR. The
revised rates (prevailing on the date of reset) shall be made applicable to the loans/ facilities
extended, from the 1st day of the corresponding month of the reset period expiry (for the initial
reset), irrespective of the actual date of availing and subsequent reset shall be on the 1st day of the
corresponding month of reset period fixed.
MCLR prevailing on the date of first disbursement shall be applicable and rate of interest will
remain unchanged until the date of next reset, irrespective of interim changes in MCLR.
b) Notwithstanding the above, the Borrower agrees that the Rate of Interest may increase on
LD/ 2172
account of the change of policy/directives of Reserve Bank of India/ variation in MCLR and /or
Spread and in that case the Borrower agrees to pay such revised rate of interest. The Borrower also
agrees that if such revised rate of interest is not acceptable, the Borrower shall make repayment of
entire balance outstanding in the loan account within a period of 30 days from the date of reset of
rate of interest without pre-payment charges. If the Borrower neither accepts the revised rate of
interest nor close the loan within 30 days from the date of reset of rate of interest, the Borrower
shall be liable to pay interest at the revised rate of interest from the date of interest rate reset and
in the event of pre-payment of loan after 30 days from the date of reset, the Borrower agrees to
pay additional interest of 2% on the prepaid amount, calculated from the end of 30 days period till
the date of pre-closure.
c) The interest shall be calculated respectively on the daily balance of the amount due.
d) Interest specified in the Sanction Letter or any other provision in the Transaction Documents
will be computed from the respective date of drawal and shall become payable upon the footing
of compound interest with monthly rests or such other rests as may be prescribed by the Bank
from time to time.
e) Interest on the outstanding amounts under the Facilities / discount or other charges when
debited to the relevant Account by the Bank, shall be calculated on the daily debit balance of such
Account. In the event of remittance being made into the account after the normal business hours
(i.e. beyond 4 hours from the commencement of business hours), but within the extended
business hours, the Bank will have the discretion to value date such remittance on the next
succeeding business day for the purpose of calculation of interest.
f) Interest, commission, discount and all other charges shall accrue from day to day and shall be
computed on the basis of 365 days a year for rupee Facilities and 360 days for foreign currency
Facilities, and the actual number of days elapsed.
g) The Borrower(s) further agrees(s) that Bank is at liberty to vary the MCLR at periodic intervals
depending on tenor/ residual tenor to next reset date and / or the Spread at such rate(s) as may
be decided by the Bank from time to time either on account of a revision in the MCLR of the Bank
for the corresponding tenor/ residual tenor and/ or deterioration in credit quality/ rating of the
Borrower(s) as assessed from time to time by the Bank or otherwise as decided by the Bank from
time to time/ as per directives of the Reserve Bank of India as the Borrower(s) agree(s) to pay the
interest at such revised rate. The Borrower specifically waives notice of variation of any change in
the interest rate/ rest and notice published in Bank‟s Notice Board/Web Site of the Bank or entry
regarding debit of interest in the statement of account shall be deemed to be sufficient notice of
variation in rate of interest/ rest to the Borrower. Further, the Bank will be entitled to effect
changes in the „Spread‟ from time to time with due intimation to the Borrower and unless and
until notified by the Bank, the prevailing Spread will continue to apply and will be added to the
applicable/ revised MCLR to determine the effective rate of interest. Provided, further that the
interest payable by the Borrower shall also be subject to the changes in the interest rates made by
Reserve Bank of India from time to time.
h) Without prejudice to the above, the Bank will also have the right to charge and the Borrower
will remain liable to pay penal interest @2% per annum or at such rate as may be prescribed by
the Bank and/or the Reserve Bank of India, from time to time, in case the borrower violates any of
the terms and conditions contained herein and/or in the sanction letter and/or for becoming the
account irregular/out of order/Non Performing Asset and/or the credit rating of the Borrower is
downgraded or on account of changes in risk weight stipulated by RBI or on any other
LD/ 2172
circumstances, as the Bank may deem fit and necessary, provided that the charging or payment of
such penal rate of interest shall be without prejudice to other rights and remedies of the Bank.
i) On account of upward revision of interest, the Bank will have absolute liberty and discretion to
refix the equated monthly instalment and in that event the Borrower shall be liable to repay the
loan with revised interest at such revised equated monthly instalment or in the alternative the
Bank may in its absolute discretion extend the period of repayment.
2.3 Pre- Payment Charges
If the borrower has availed the loan on Fixed Rate of Interest, the Borrower agrees to pay
Prepayment Charges in the event of prepayment of the loan, either partly or fully at the rates
mentioned below or at such other rates as may be fixed by the Bank from time to time:
i) If the loan is closed from own sources after two years from the date of availment, no pre-
payment charges will be charged.
ii) If the loan is closed from own sources before 2 years, pre-payment charges @1% of the pre-
paid amount will be charged.
iii) If the loan is closed through take over by other Banks/Financial Institutions, pre-payment
charges @2% of the pre-paid amount will be charged.
2.4 Payment of Other Charges/ Fees
The Borrower agrees to pay processing fee/upfront fee, commitment charges, valuation charges,
documentation charges, inspection charges and such other charges fixed by the bank from time to
time.
2.5 DELIVERY OF POST-DATED CHEQUES BY BORROWER
On demand the Borrower agrees to deliver to the Bank post-dated cheques for the monthly
instalments and the Borrower warrants that the cheque will be honoured on first presentation.
Any non-presentation of a cheque due to any reason will not affect the liability of the Borrower to
pay the monthly instalments or any other sum. The Borrower agrees to forthwith replace the
cheque/issue fresh cheques if required by the Bank. The borrower shall not be entitled to call
upon the Bank to refrain from presenting any cheque for payment and if the borrower does so,
the Bank shall nevertheless be entitled to present the cheque for payment and in the event of
dishonour the provisions under Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 shall apply.
2.6 Statement of account/ extract from the computer to be conclusive proof
The Borrower(s) agrees to accept as conclusive proof of the correctness of any sum claimed to be
due from them to the Bank under the respective agreements for credit facility(ies), a statement of
account/ extract from the computer or otherwise without the production of any
voucher/document/register.
2.7 Bank’s right to appropriate amount paid by the Borrower(s)
The Borrower agree, declare, affirm and confirm that notwithstanding any of the provisions of the
Contract Act or any other law or any terms and conditions to the contrary contained in this
Agreement and/or any security documents, any payment(s) made by the Borrower to the Bank
LD/ 2172
shall unless otherwise agreed by the Bank in writing be appropriated by the Bank in the following
manner:-
First towards costs, charges, expenses and other moneys, due and payable or becoming due and
payable to the Bank;
Secondly towards interest due and payable and/or accruing due and payable to the Bank; and
Lastly towards repayment of the amount of any instalment(s) of the Principal sums due and
payable or becoming due and payable to the Bank.
2.8 Events of Default
Notwithstanding anything contained herein or in the security documents, Bank may at its sole and
absolute discretion recall the whole advance and the Bank will be entitled to enforce its security
upon the happening of any of the following events, viz:-
a. Any one or more instalment(s) (EMI) being unpaid upon the due date for payment thereof;
b. The Borrower/s committing any breach of default in the performance or observance of these
presents and/or the borrower's proposal and/or security documents or any other terms or
conditions relating to the advance;
c. The Borrowers/Guarantor(s) entering into any agreement or composition with its creditors or
commit any act of insolvency;
d. Any execution or distress being enforced or levied against the whole or any part of the
Borrower's/Guarantor(s)‟s properties;
e. The Borrower/Guarantor(s) going into insolvency proceedings;
f. A Receiver being appointed in respect of the whole or any part of the property of the
Borrower/Guarantor(s).
g. The Borrower/Guarantor(s) ceasing or threatening to cease, to carry on its activities;
h. The occurrence of any event or any circumstance which is prejudicial to or impairs, imperils or
depreciates or is likely to prejudice, impair, imperil or depreciate the security given to the Bank;
and
i. The occurrence of any event or circumstance which would prejudicially or is like to prejudicially
or adversely affect in any manner the capacity of the Borrower to repay the loan.
On the question whether any of the above events has happened,the decision of the Bank shall be
conclusive and binding on the Borrower .
ARTICLE III
SECURITY FOR THE FACILITY & OTHER TERMS
3.1 Security
a. The Borrower(s) agrees to furnish security, guarantee etc. as stipulated in the sanction letter of
the Bank and as demanded by the Bank from time to time. The Borrower(s) agrees to maintain
such security margin as may be stipulated by the Bank. The Borrower(s) also agrees that the
security offered for one facility shall be additional security for all other credit facilities. The Bank
shall have absolute right to decide whether or not it will accept security for the purpose of
LD/ 2172
any/some/all of the aforesaid credit facilities any movables and other assets offered to the Bank
from time to time by the Borrower(s). The Bank shall be at liberty at its sole and absolute
discretion at any time without previous notice and without assigning any reasons whatsoever to
cease to accept the security from the Borrower(s) and/or to cease make advance there against.
b. The Borrower shall not, without the written consent of the Bank, create in any manner any
charge, lien or other encumbrance on the security given to the Bank in respect of such advance or
create any interest in such security in favour of any other party or person.
3.2 Bank’s right of General lien and Set Off
a. The Bank shall have the right of set-off/net off on the deposits of any kind and nature (including
fixed deposits) held/balances lying in any accounts of the Borrower and on any monies, securities,
bonds and all other assets, documents, deeds and properties held by/under the control of the
Bank / their trustees or agents (whether by way of security or otherwise pursuant to any contract
entered/to be entered into by the Borrower in any capacity) to the extent of all outstanding dues,
whatsoever, arising as a result of any of the Bank‟ services extended to and/or used by the
Borrower and/or as a result of any other facilities that may be granted by the Bank to the
Borrower. The Borrower also notes the banker‟s lien available to the Bank on the aforesaid assets.
b. In addition to the above mentioned right or any other right which the Bank may at any time be
entitled whether by operation of law, contract or otherwise, the Borrower authorises the Bank: (A)
to combine or consolidate at any time all or any of the accounts and liabilities of the Borrower
with or to any branch of the Bank; (B) to sell or dispose off any of the Borrower‟s securities or
properties held by the Bank by way of public or private sale or assignment or in any other manner
whatsoever without having to institute any judicial proceeding whatsoever and retain/appropriate
from the proceeds derived there from the total amounts outstanding to the Bank from the
Borrower, including costs and expenses in connection with such sale / disposal / transfer /
assignment.
3.3 Insurance
The Borrower agree that all the assets hypothecated, pledged, mortgaged or otherwise charged
to the Bank as security for the aforesaid credit facilities shall be kept at the Borrower‟s risk and
expenses in good condition and fully insured against fire and/or such other risk(s) as the Bank may
from time to time stipulate in the joint name of the Borrower and the Bank with an insurance
company approved by the Bank and for such amount as the Bank may consider necessary and that
the insurance policies shall be delivered to the Bank. If the Borrower fails to effect such insurance,
the Bank may, without being obliged to do so, insure the movable and immovable and other
assets against fire and such other risk(s) in joint names of Bank and Borrower and debit the
premium and such other charges to any account of the Borrower opened or to be opened. The
Borrower agrees that debiting of insurance premium for a particular year(s) will not cast any
obligation on the Bank to take out insurance policies of the secured assets in subsequent years. In
the event of Bank being at any time apprehensive that the safety of the goods/assets is likely to be
endangered owing to riot and/or strike (including fire arising therefrom) and/or floods,
earthquakes etc. and/or also resulting in the loss of production therefrom, the Bank may at its own
discretion, but without being bound to do so, insure or require the Borrower to insure in joint
names against any damage arising therefrom, the cost of such extra insurance being payable by
the Borrower be debited to any such account. If the Bank desires that the assets shall be insured
LD/ 2172
against theft, the Borrower shall provide sufficient cover therefor. The Borrower agrees that in the
event of loss of insured asset, the Borrower shall submit the insurance claim to the insurance
company under intimation to the Bank and in the event of receipt of claim amount directly from
the insurance company the Borrower undertakes to remit the same to the Bank. The Borrower
further expressly agree that the Bank shall be entitled to adjust, settle, compromise or refer to
arbitration any dispute arising under or in connection with any insurance and such adjustment,
settlement, compromise and any award made on such arbitration shall be valid and binding on the
Borrower and also to receive all monies payable under any such insurance or under any claim
made thereunder and to give a valid receipt therefor, and that the amount so received shall be
credited to the Borrower‟s account and the Borrower shall not raise question that a larger sum
might or ought to have been received or be entitled to dispute its liability for the balance
remaining due on any account or accounts after such credit. Provided that the Bank may at its
sole, absolute and unqualified discretion waive all or any of these requirements.
ARTICLE IV
DISCLOSURE OF DETAILS OF BORROWER AND VALIDITY OF THE AGREEMENT
4.1 Disclosure of details of Borrower(s)
(a) The Borrower(s) agree as a pre-condition of the credit facility granted by the Bank that in case
any default is committed in the repayment of the loan/advance or in repayment of interest
thereon or any of the agreed instalment of the loan on due date/s, the Bank and/or the Reserve
Bank of India will have an unqualified right to disclose or publish the name and photograph of the
Borrower(s) as defaulter in such manner and though such medium as the Bank or the Reserve
Bank of India in their absolute discretion may think fit.
(b) The Borrower(s) agree as a precondition of the loan/advances given to him/them by the bank,
the Borrower(s) hereby agrees and give consent to the disclosure by the Bank of all or any such (a)
information and data relating to the Borrower(s), (b) the information or data relating to any credit
facility availed of/to be availed by the Borrower(s) and (c) default, if any, committed by the
Borrower(s) in discharge of Borrower(s)‟ such obligation as the Bank may deem, appropriate and
necessary, to disclose and furnish to Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd (CIBIL) or any other
agency authorised in this behalf by RBI. The Borrower(s) also declares that the information and
data furnished by the Borrower(s) to the bank are true and correct. The Borrower(s) undertakes
that (a) the Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL) or any other agency so authorised may
use, process the said information and data disclosed by the Bank in the manner as deemed fit by
them; and (b) the Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL) or any other agency so authorised
may furnish for consideration, the proposed information and data or products thereof prepared by
them, to any Banks/Financial Institutions and other credit grantors or registered users, as may be
specified by Reserve Bank of India in this behalf. Further, the Borrower(s) hereby confirm that the
Borrower(s) shall not raise any dispute in whatsoever manner regarding information/details
furnished to CIBIL/other authorities and the same is binding on the Borrower(s).
4.2 Agreement not prejudicial to any rights or remedies of the Bank
Nothing contained herein shall prejudice any rights or remedies of the Bank in respect of any
present or future security, guarantee, obligation or decree for any indebtedness or liability of the
Borrowerto the Bank.
LD/ 2172
4.3 Special Conditions
In addition to the other terms and conditions stated in this Agreement, the General Conditions
and the other Transaction Documents, the Borrower shall also comply with the terms and
conditions specified in Schedule III hereto.
4.4 Severability of provisions
If any provision of this agreement is illegal, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, it will be
severed from the remaining provisions, which will remain unaffected.
4.5 Validity of the agreement
This agreement shall be valid and binding on the Borrower till the ultimate balance with interest
thereon to become payable upon the said loan account including all moneys lent, advanced, paid
or incurred together with interest, discount, commission and other banking charges as fixed by the
bank from time to time and other costs, charges and expenses which may become payable in
connection therewith.
4.6 INTERPRETATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE AGREEMENT
For the purposes of interpretation and construction of this agreement:
a) Words importing one gender include the other;
b) Words importing the singular or plural number include the plural and singular numbers
respectively;
c) Any schedule, and the provision and conditions contained in such schedule will have the same
effect as if set out in the body of the agreement. In the event of any conflict between the
Schedule and the body of this agreement, the provisions and conditions in the Schedule of this
agreement will prevail.
d) The Section Headings or Chapter Headings used in this Agreement are intended for
convenience only and shall not be used in interpreting this agreement or in determining any of
the rights/ obligations of the parties to the Agreement.
4.7WAIVER OF RIGHTS INCONSISTENT TO THE AGREEMENT
The Borrower(s)/ Applicant(s) hereby further waive all his/ her/their rights inconsistent herewith
which the Borrower(s)/ Applicant(s) may otherwise be entitled to claim and enforce in respect
thereof.
Borrower(s) The South Indian Bank Ltd.
LD/ 2172
SCHEDULE – I
a. Date and Place of Agreement
b. Details of the Borrower(s)
Name of the Borrower(s)
Constitution of the Borrower(s)
PAN/ TAN/ CIN of the Borrower
Address of the Borrower
E-mail id
Phone No/s.
c. Details of the Branch
Place of the Branch
Address of the Branch
Fax No/s.
E-mail id
Phone No/s.
d. Details of facility
Date of Sanction letter (LD 1100/
1100A)
Amount of facility (in figures)
Amount of facility (in words)
e. Purpose of Loan
f. Person authorised to draw the loan in
stages, in case of Joint borrowal
SCHEDULE – II
a. Period of Loan __________ months
b. Equated Monthly Instalments (EMI)
c. Date of Payment of 1st Instalment
LD/ 2172
d. Applicable Rate of Interest
The Applicable Rate of interest for the facility granted/ to be granted to the Borrower is as
follows:
Sl.
No.
Nature of the
limit
Rate of Interest Rest Remarks, if any.
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)
1
2
3
f. Prepayment / Pre-closure Charges
The Borrower agrees that Bank is entitled to charge pre-payment/ pre-closure charges as
mentioned herein below:-
SCHEDULE - III
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
Borrower(s)
1
USFB/MSME-NLD26
UNSECURED LOAN AGREEMENT for Individual/ Proprietorship/Partnership
INSTRUCTIONS FOR FILLING LOAN AGREEMENT
CITY
NAME OF APPLICANT
DATE OF LOAN AGREEMENT
LOAN AMOUNT (₹)
EMI (₹)
TENOR
General Instructions
1. All applications to be filled in English in CAPITAL LETTERS using a ballpoint pen only.
2. There should not be any amendments/ overwriting/ erasures/ cutting on the Loan
Agreement and any amendments/ overwriting/ erasures/ cutting should be counter signed.
3. The Signature of the Borrower and Co-borrower should be the same on Loan Agreement
& Application Form.
4. The full signature of the Borrower and Co-borrower is to be put in all the places where
there is a mark.
5. The full signature of the Borrower is to be put in all the places on the Document where
there is a mark.
Language Declaration Signature
English I have understood all the terms and conditions of the agreement
which have been explained to me in the language that I
understand.
Hindi
Sign against the appropriate box
2
USFB/MSME-NLD26
(Stamp duty as may be applicable on agreement + Power of attorney + indemnity)
LOAN AGREEMENT
THIS LOAN AGREEMENT (hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement”) made at the place and
on the date as more particularly mentioned in the Schedule hereunder written between:
The Borrower as mentioned in the Schedule hereto (the "Borrower", which term shall, unless
repugnant to the context be deemed to include the Co-Borrower(s), if any, as detailed in the
Schedule hereto and in case of (a) an individual, his/her/their heirs, executors and
administrators (b) a proprietorship firm, the proprietor(ess) ( in his/her personal capacity and
as proprietor(ess) of the concern) and his/her/their heirs, legal representatives, executors and
administrators, permitted assigns), (c) a Company within the meaning of the Companies Act,
1956 / 2013, its successors and permitted assigns, (d) a limited liability partnership, its
successors and permitted assigns, (e) a partnership firm, each of the partners and survivor(s)
of them and the partners from time to time (in their personal capacity and as partners of the
firm) and their respective heirs, legal representatives, executors and administrators; and (f) a
trust, the trustees and/ or the beneficiaries for the time being of the trust and survivors or
survivor of the trustees and/ or beneficiaries and the successors-in-interest, executors,
administrators of the last surviving trustee and/or beneficiary and their successors and
permitted assigns), of the Other Part.
AND
UTKARSH SMALL FINANCE BANK LIMITED, a Banking company incorporated in India under
Companies Act 2013, bearing CIN U65992UP2016PLC082804 and having its Registered Office
at: Utkarsh Tower, NH - 31 (Airport Road) Sehmalpur, Kazi Sarai, Harhua, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh - 221105 and which has its branch office at_______________________________(Branch
Location) as more particularly described in the Schedule appended to this Agreement,
hereinafter referred to as the “Lender/Bank” (which expression shall, unless it be repugnant
to the context or meaning thereof, be deemed to mean and include its successors in interest
and permitted assigns) of the First Part
The Borrower and the Lender shall be hereinafter singularly referred to as the “Party” and
collectively referred to as the “Parties”.
WHEREAS:
A. The Borrower is inter-alia engaged in/carrying on the business/ profession as specified in
the Schedule annexed below and is desirous of availing a loan in the course of its/his/her/their
business/profession;
3
USFB/MSME-NLD26
: Pursuant to the request from the Borrower for grant of certain credit facilities made to the
Lender, the Lender has sanctioned certain credit facilities, the details of which is specified in
the Schedule annexed below and has issued a Sanction letter outlining the major conditions
attached to the agreement of loan (hereinafter referred to as the “Sanction Letter”) to the
Borrower and in pursuance thereof, the Lender has granted/agreed to grant the Credit facility
as more particularly described in the Schedule hereunder written (hereinafter referred to as
the “Loan”) to the Borrower, upon the Borrower agreeing to repay the dues under the Loan
with interest and other charges as hereinafter mentioned and on the Borrower agreeing to
create the security as provided herein and agreeing to comply with the terms and conditions
contained herein in addition to the other terms and conditions stipulated by the Bank in the
Sanction Letter and also as may be specified in any other documents executed or tendered
or agreed to be executed or tendered at a future date in respect of the Loan between the
parties hereto (collectively referred to as the “Transaction Documents”) or as notified from
time to time by the Bank to the Borrower.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements set forth herein,
the Parties hereto, intending to be legally bound, agree as follows:
DEFINITIONS
In this agreement unless the context otherwise requires.
“Agreement” means this agreement.
“Application” means application made by the Borrower to the Bank for the Financial Facility
and all other information and documents submitted by the Borrower to the Bank with a view
to get the Bank to make available the Financial Facility.
“EMI” or “Equated Monthly Installments” means the amount of monthly payment necessary
to amortise the Financial Facilities with interest, over the period of the Financial Facilities.
“Environmental, Social and Governance Laws” means any law, rules and regulations
(including international treaty obligations) applicable concerning (i) environmental matters
and natural resource management, (ii) employees and labour and their condition of workplace
(particularly compliance with regulations relating to child and forced labour, discrimination
and rights of association), (iii) protection of occupational as well as public health and safety,
(iv) the regulations of public participation, (vi) the protection and regulations of ownership of
land rights (both formal and traditional), immovable goods and intellectual and cultural
property rights, (v) all other laws, rules and regulations providing protection of employees
and citizens, including respecting human rights life and fire safety and building integrity laws,
rules and regulations.
“Environmental, Social and Governance Action Plan” means a plan (if any) setting out
specific environmental, social and governance measures to be undertaken by Borrower,
acceptable to both Parties and developed by Borrower and / or Bank.
“Excluded Activity” means any of the activities listed in Bank’s ESG Exclusion List.
4
USFB/MSME-NLD26
“Financial Facility” means the term loan sanctioned/to be sanctioned by the Bank to the
Borrower in a sum as set out at Serial No.1 of the Schedule written hereunder and up to which
the Bank may lend and advance to the Borrower and includes where the context so requires
outstanding amounts under the Financial Facility, on the terms and conditions prescribed by
the Bank from time to time and in force at the time of repayment.
“Sanction Letter” means the letter bearing number _____________ dated __________ and
addressed by the Bank to the Borrower and conveying the in principle sanction of the Bank of
the Financial Facility to the Borrower.
“Person” means any person, firm, company, corporation, society, government, state or
agency of a state or any association or partnership (whether or not having separate legal
personality) or two or more of the foregoing;
Reporting means an annual report as required by Bank, and that Borrower reports serious
Environmental, Social and Governance incidents (including specifically fatalities) within 24
hours of occurrence.
“Security/Securities” means all, any or each of the guarantees and all assets, whether
moveable or immoveable over which security, from time to time, is created or executed in
favour of the Bank to secure the amounts outstanding under the Financial Facility or any part
thereof;
1. LOAN AND TERMS OF THE LOAN
1.1 Loan
Based upon the Borrower’s request, representations, warranties, covenants and undertakings
as contained herein and in the loan application as well as Sanction Letter and other
Transaction Documents executed / to be executed, by the Borrower in relation to the Loan,
the Lender has agreed to make available to the Borrower and the Borrower has agreed to avail
from the Lender, the Loan in the manner and on such terms and conditions mentioned in this
Agreement and its Schedule. The Loan shall be granted for the tenure as provided in the
Schedule hereunder written. In consideration of the Loan being sanctioned by the Lender, the
Borrower agrees to unconditionally abide by and observe all the terms and conditions herein
after set out and as may be stipulated by the Lender from time to time.
1.2 Purpose of Loan
The Loan has been granted for by the Lender to the Borrower for its use in the course of
business and is more particularly provided in the Schedule hereunder written. The Borrower
covenants that the Loan or amount advanced will be utilized for the purpose as stated herein
and shall not be utilized for any other purpose and all the terms and conditions of sanction of
the Loan will be duly observed.
1.3 Interest
1.3.1 The Borrower covenants with the Bank to pay interest on the Loan or such sum as may
be due by the Borrower to the Bank from time to time at the rate and periodicity as mentioned
in the Schedule hereunder written till the entire outstanding Loan amount and interest thereon
is repaid by the Borrower.
5
USFB/MSME-NLD26
1.3.2. The Borrower further agrees that the Bank shall be entitled to revise the rate of interest,
additional interest and/or periodicity of charging interest etc. as mentioned herein at any time
during the tenure of the Loan by giving notice to the Borrower and/ or notifying
on the notice board of the Bank or in the website of the bank or by any approved means of
communication including e-mail and SMS and shall thereafter be entitled to charge interest
at the changed rate / rests as if the same was provided for in this Agreement.
1.3.3 The Borrower shall reimburse or pay to the Lender such amount as may have been paid
or payable by the Lender to the Central or State Government on account of any tax levied
on interest (and/or other charges) on the Loan by the Central or State Government. The
Borrower shall make the reimbursement or payment as and when called upon to do so by the
Lender.
1.3.4 Additional Interest:
On occurrence of any Event of Default as specified hereunder including but not limited to
delay or failure of the Borrower to pay any amount on the due date as provided in the
Schedule hereunder written, the Bank reserves the right to impose additional interest at such
rate as provided in the Schedule hereunder written. Such obligation to pay the additional /
default interest shall arise without the need for any notice thereof or demand therefore. It is
hereby clarified that payment of any additional/default interest shall not entitle the Borrower
to delay the payments towards the amounts due in respect of the Loan. The Lender’s right to
charge additional interest shall not, in any manner whatsoever, impair or hinder the Lender’s
rights to seek recourse to any other remedies available with the Lender on occurrence of an
Event of Default.
1.3.5 Increased Cost:
The Borrower agrees to pay to the Lender, the amount of any cost incurred by the Lender or
any of its affiliates as a result of:
a) the introduction of, or any change in, or any change in the interpretation, administration or
application of, any law or regulation; and/or
b) compliance with any law or regulation made effective after the date of Sanction Letter;
and/or
c) additional solicitor’s and lawyer’s fees or introduction of new or additional stamp duty,
registration charges and other incidental expenses incurred or levied in connection with the
Loan.
The Applicable Law shall mean and include all statutory, enactments, Acts of the legislature
in India, Laws, Ordinance, rules, bye laws regulations, notifications, guidelines, policies,
directions, directives and Orders of any Govt. and / or regulator as amended from time to
time.
1.4 Interest Reset
1.4.1 The rate of interest stipulated will be subject to revision during the tenure of the Loan
and shall be reset, depending on the Cost of fund of the Lender or depending on the directives
6
USFB/MSME-NLD26
of Reserve Bank of India from time to time. The said revision, if any, shall be intimated to the
Borrower through any of the accepted modes of communication by the Lender.
The rate of interest under Fixed Rate Option may be reviewed and re-set by the Bank, from
time to time or on directions of Reserve Bank of India. The rate of interest under Fixed Rate
Option may be reviewed and re-set by the Bank on completion of each Block Period of 5 years.
For this purpose 1st year of each Block Period will commence from 1st of April of the year in
which the first disbursement under the Loan is made, irrespective of the month of
disbursement, and shall end on 31st March of the following year. After completion of each
Block period, the interest rate as re-set will be applicable. If there is any delay in revision/reset
in interest rate, appropriate adjustment may be made in the account, effective from 1st April
of the year. If the interest rate is not re-set, the prevailing rate shall continue to be applied until
it is re-set. If interest rate is not re-set in the year when it is due, it shall be open to Bank to re-
set the interest in any subsequent year and, in such an event, the interest rate as re-set, will
be applicable from 1st April of the year in which it is re-set for the remaining years of the block
period.
1.5 Fees, Charges, Duties and Taxes
1.5.1 It has been agreed between the Parties that processing fees, administrative fees,
commitment charges, charges towards issuance of duplicate statements, cheque bouncing
charges, late payment charges and such other charges as are specified in the Schedule
hereunder written shall be payable on the sanctioned Loan amount by the Borrower. Further,
it has been agreed that all taxes and duties including /GST are to be borne by the Borrower.
1.5.2 The Borrower shall bear and pay all such imposts, duties and taxes (including Interest,
stamp duty and other taxes, if any) as may be levied from time to time by any Government or
other authority with the sanction of law, pertaining to or in respect of the Loan amount.
1.5.3 All sums payable by the Borrower under this Agreement shall be paid free of any
restriction or condition and free and clear of and without any counter-claim, set off, deduction
or withholding, whether on account of tax deductions, charges, stamp duty, liability or impost
or otherwise, if any, and the Borrower agrees as follows:
(a) The Borrower shall make all payments to be made by it without any tax deduction, unless
a tax deduction is required by law;
(b) The Borrower shall promptly upon becoming aware that it must make a tax deduction (or
that there is any change in the rate or the basis of a tax deduction) notify the Bank accordingly;
(c) If a tax deduction is required by Law to be made by the Borrower, the amount of the
payment due from the Borrower shall be increased to an amount which (after making any tax
deduction) leaves an amount equal to the payment which would have been due if no tax
deduction had been required;
(d) If the Borrower is required to make a tax deduction, the Borrower shall make that tax
deduction and any payment required in connection with that tax deduction within the time
allowed and in the minimum amount required by Law;
(e) Within 30 (Thirty) days of making either a tax deduction or any payment required in
connection with that tax deduction, the Borrower shall deliver to the Bank evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the Bank that the tax deduction has been made or (as applicable)
any appropriate payment paid to the relevant taxing authority.
7
USFB/MSME-NLD26
1.5.4 The Borrower shall reimburse all sums paid and/or expenses incurred by the Lender in
relation to the Loan within 30 (thirty) days from the date of intimation by the Lender as and
when called upon to do so by the Lender or the Lender shall be entitled to include such
amounts into the principal amount of the Loan and modify the EMIs and/or tenure of the Loan
as may be decided by the Lender. All such sums shall carry additional interest from date of
payment till such reimbursement at the rate specified in the Schedule.
1.6 Drawdown/ Disbursement
1.6.1 The Lender shall disburse the Loan as per the disbursement schedule provided in the
Schedule hereto either in one lump sum or in suitable instalments/tranches upon the receipt
of the disbursal request form from the Borrower to the Lender. Disbursement shall be made
in such mode and manner as provided in the Schedule annexed here in this agreement.
1.6.2 It is further agreed between the Parties that where the declared end use or any
integral part thereof, during the subsistence of this Agreement, is declared illegal or becomes
illegal on account of any promulgation, amendment, modification or re-enactment of any
statute, notification, circular or order etc., then this Agreement shall stand terminated from
the date from which the declared end use or any integral part thereof has become illegal, and
the Borrower shall be liable to repay the entire Loan amount along with accrued interest,
costs, charges, levies etc. forthwith to the Lender.
1.6. 3 After execution of this Agreement, the Borrower shall not be entitled to cancel the
Loan or refuse to accept the disbursement of the Loan, except with the approval of the Lender
and on payment to the Lender, of such cancellation charges or foreclosure charges as
provided in the Schedule hereunder and as may be modified by the Lender from time to time.
The Bank shall however have the right to terminate all and/or any undrawn part of the Loan
without giving notice to the Borrower. The Borrower shall be informed and intimated by the
Bank of such termination of the undrawn amount of the Loan as soon as practicable by the
Bank.
2. REPAYMENT / PREPAYMENT
Repayment:
2.1.1 The Loan (including but not limited to the principal, interest thereon and any other
charges, expenses, interest, additional interest, premium, fees, taxes, including GST, levies
or other dues payable by the Borrower to the Lender in terms of this Agreement) shall be
repayable by the Borrower to the Lender at the place in terms of the repayment schedule and
in the manner provided in the Schedule hereunder written.
2.1.2. The Borrower undertakes to open an account with the designated Branch of the Lender
as per the instructions of the Lender and keep sufficient balance and give standing instructions
to the Lender to debit the said account on the respective due dates for the EMI amount
together with all the interest and charges due and payable to them Lender.
2.1.3 The EMI amount (as provided in the Schedule hereunder written) shall be arrived at so
as to comprise repayment of principal and payment of interest calculated on the basis of the
interest rate, periodicity of compounding, periodicity of repayment, periodicity of effecting
credits in the account so as to aim repayment of the entire liability under the Loan at the end
of its tenure and the Borrower agrees to continue paying EMIs until all amounts due and
payable by the Borrower under the Loan have been repaid in full to the Lender.
8
USFB/MSME-NLD26
2.1.4 No notice, reminder or intimation shall be given to the Borrower/Co-borrower regarding
its obligation to pay the amount payable hereunder on the due date and it shall be entirely the
Borrower’s responsibility to ensure prompt and regular payment of the amount payable by
the Borrower to the Lender on the due date and in the manner provided in the Schedule.2.1.5
All sums payable by the Borrower under this Agreement shall be paid free of any restriction
or condition and free and clear of and without any counter claim, set off, deduction or
withholding, whether on account of tax or otherwise
2.1.6 Prepayment:
The Lender may, in its sole discretion and on such terms as to pre-payment fees, etc., as it
may prescribe, permit pre-payment / acceleration of
Instalments or pre-payment at the request of the Borrower, subject to the condition that the
Lender may specify, from time to time, the minimum amount of prepayment/amounts payable
on account of acceleration of Instalments. If permitted by the Lender, the Borrower shall give
prior written notice of its intention to pre-pay the full amount of the Loan and pay to the Lender
such pre-payment charges as may be prescribed by the Lender from time to time.
Any pre-payment of any part of the Loan has to be made in accordance with the conditions
specified by the Lender and subject to applicable prepayment charges which shall be levied
on the Borrower by the Lender. Save and except as mentioned above, the Borrower shall not
be entitled to make any pre-payment. Notwithstanding the above, if the Borrower pays any
amount to the Lender before the due date, the Lender shall be entitled to appropriate the
same in such manner as it deems fit. The Lender will give the Borrower credit for the same
only on the due date and not before.
In the event the Lender permits any pre-payment, the repayment schedule may be altered by
the Lender at the request of the Borrower and the Borrower agrees to adhere to the altered
re-payment schedule.
2.1.7 Borrower’s Liability:
The Borrower’s liability hereunder shall not be affected, terminated or prejudiced by any
amendments to or changes in the Borrower’s constitution, or upon the Borrower becoming
bankrupt or insolvent or any proceeding in respect thereof or any analogous step, but such
liability shall continue in full force and effect and shall be binding on the Borrower’s respective
successors, permitted assigns and legal heirs
3. CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
3.1 The Lender shall have the discretion to not disburse at any time, any amount under the
Loan unless the following conditions are complied with in the sole discretion of the Lender:
3.1.1 The Loan Agreement and such other Transaction Documents are duly executed, and
delivered to the Lender by the Borrower;
3.1.2 The Borrower shall have provided such information as may be called by the Lender in
order to verify the credit worthiness of the Borrower;
3.1.3 The Borrower submits to the satisfaction of the Lender all such documents for
verification as are required to be provided under the Bank’s policies;
3.1.4 The Borrower submits to the Lender, SI/ NACH mandate towards repayment of all the
installments.
3.1.5 The Borrower submits to the Lender, any other documents or writing including Power
of Attorney in favour of the Lender, as the Lender may require in its sole discretion.
9
USFB/MSME-NLD26
3.2 The Lender may not, having disbursed any amount, disburse any further amount under
the Loan, unless the following conditions are complied with, in the sole discretion of the
Lender before such further disbursement: -
3.2.1 No Event of Default as specified in clause 8 hereinafter shall have occurred;
3.2.2 The Borrower shall have produced evidence of the utilization of prior disbursements and
also in respect of proposed disbursements;
3.2.3 The Borrower shall have produced his/their periodic financial statements;
3.2.4 No extra ordinary circumstances shall have occurred, which in the sole opinion of the
Lender may make it improbable for the Borrower or otherwise adversely affect his/their
capability of fulfilling any of the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement.
4. CONDITIONS AND COVENANTS
4.1 In consideration of the Lender having advanced/agreed to advance the Loan to the
Borrower, the Borrower hereby undertakes that it shall comply with the following conditions
and covenants during the Tenure of this Agreement and until full repayment of the amounts
due under this Agreement:
4.1.1 Affirmative Covenants
The Borrower shall comply with the following:
i. Obtain, comply with the terms of and do all that is necessary to maintain in full force and
effect all authorizations, approvals, licenses and consents if any required to enable it to enter
into and perform its obligations under this Agreement and to ensure the legality, validity,
enforceability or admissibility in evidence of this Agreement;
ii. Use the said Loan for the purpose for which it is sanctioned. In case the Borrower fails for
any reason to utilize the Loan for the said purpose or utilizes any part of the said Loan for any
purpose other than the said purpose, the Lender shall be entitled to rescind this Agreement
on that ground and to recall the Loan on 15 (fifteen) days’ notice in writing to the Borrower/Co-
borrower.
Iii. Conduct the business to the best of its ability, in an orderly, efficient and customary
manner.
iv. Promptly give written notice to the Lender of:
a. all litigation /dispute / action from/against the Borrower from anyone (including any
governmental or regulatory authority) materially affecting the Borrower, which is threatened
and/or likely to be filed and/or filed,
b. any Event of Default under the terms of this Agreement or of any document provided for
herein.
v. Promptly inform the Lender if the Borrower is on the verge of being declared as
bankrupt/insolvent.
Vi. Pay all costs, charges and expenses in any way incurred by the Lender, including travelling
and other allowances, such stamp duty, registration fees, other duties, taxes, charges and
other penalties if and when the Borrower is required to pay according to the laws for the time
being in force., and in the event of the Borrower failing to pay such stamp duty, other duties,
taxes and penalties, as aforesaid, the Lender will be at liberty (but shall not be obliged) to pay
the same and the Borrower shall reimburse the same to the Lender on demand with Interest
thereon at the same rate as on defaulted Installments in respect of the Loan as specified
hereinabove with monthly rests from the date of payment and until such reimbursement by
10
USFB/MSME-NLD26
the Borrower. The Borrower shall pay inspection charges, commitment charges and all other
applicable charges.
Vii. Upon notice from the Lender, pay or reimburse to them all legal charges, costs and
expenses in any way incurred by them in connection with or relating to this transaction.,
including cost towards searches, travelling allowances, drafting, stamping and registration of
the Transaction Documents, obtaining any other requisite approvals as may be applicable and
the fees of the Lender’s legal counsel.
viii. The Borrower shall maintain a Fixed Debt Service Ratio (as defined in the Bank’s policies)
and also comply with other norms in accordance with the Bank’s policies.
ix. The Borrower shall ensure strict compliance of all applicable laws and statutory / regulatory
requirements, permissions, approvals, sanctions, conditions and requirements of the State or
Central government / local authorities.
x. The Borrower shall provide regular certification by a Company Secretary/ Chartered
Accountant, regarding compliance of various statutory prescriptions as per the Reserve Bank
of India (“RBI”) guidelines issued from time to time, on a quarterly basis.
xi. The Borrower shall not undertake expansion / diversification without obtaining prior written
permission of the Lender and without proper tie-up of funds.
Xii. The Borrower shall furnish to the Bank all such information, statements, particulars,
estimates and reports as the Bank may require from time to time. as to the compliance with
the terms of this Agreement and shall also submit to the Bank, in form and detail satisfactory
to the Bank, the Financial Statements at such intervals and time, as may be prescribed/
required by the Bank from time to time.
xiii. The Borrower hereby agrees and authorizes the Lender and/or its regulator(s) or any third
parties appointed by the Lender and / or its regulator(s) to inspect the Borrower’s premises
and/or books of accounts. The Borrower shall reimburse all costs and expenses incurred by
the Lender, its regulator(s), third parties appointed by the Lender or its regulator(s) for such
purposes.
xiv. The Lender shall have the right to withdraw/modify all/any of the sanction conditions or
stipulate fresh conditions under intimation to the Borrower/Co-borrower.
xv. The Borrower hereby agrees to accept as conclusive proof of the correctness of any sum
claimed by the Bank to be due from the Borrower in respect of the said Loan, a statement of
account made out from the books of the Bank and signed by an officer of the Bank, without
production of any voucher, documents or other papers.
xvi. The Borrower shall perform and execute, upon request of the Bank, such acts and deeds,
as may be necessary to carry out the intent of this Agreement
The Borrower covenants with the Bank that the Borrower shall apprise/inform the Bank of the
occurrence or likely occurrence of any event which is likely to affect the capacity of the
Borrower to repay the said Loan or interest there-on or likely to affect the Security for the said
Loan or the obligations of the Borrower to the Bank in respect of the said Loan.
4.1.2 Negative covenants:
Except with the prior written consent of the Lender, the Borrower shall not:
(a) Undertake any expansion or make any capital expenditure other than those
estimated/projected;
(b) Enter into borrowing arrangements either on secured or unsecured basis with any other
persons/banks/financial institutions other than the Lender;
11
USFB/MSME-NLD26
(c) Undertake guarantee obligations on behalf of any other person/ borrower/organization;
(d) Enter into any contractual obligations of a long-term nature affecting the Borrower
financially to a significant extent;
(e) Use the Lender’s funds towards unrelated activity or invest the Lender’s funds in shares,
debentures, deposits or other instrument of any entity;
(f) Encumber or dispose of any of the assets owned and held by the Borrower.
4.1.3 Other Covenants
Borrower covenants to Bank that:
a) Borrower shall comply with all laws (including laws relating to environment, social
labour and governance Laws) applicable to the Parties.
b) Borrower agrees that it shall not directly or indirectly, take part in or financing any
activity, production, use of, trade in, distribution of, or otherwise involved in any
excluded activity except that, in the case of tobacco, the Bank shall use all reasonable
efforts not to provide funding to clients engaged in such activities and shall ensure
that in all events, the Party’s aggregate funding to such clients shall not at any time
exceed two per cent. (2%) of the Party’s total disbursed portfolio in respect of such
Relevant Financing Operations.
c) Borrower shall put in place appropriate procedures and policies to restrict its
employees, consultants or other agents from causing breach of (a) any conditions,
covenants or undertakings under this [agreement] and (b) Environmental, Social and
Governance Laws.
d) Borrower shall put in place appropriate procedures and policies to prohibit the
engagement of any person under 18 years of age on a worksite, regardless of their
direct employer.
e) Borrower shall put in place appropriate procedures and policies to respect the right
of all workers to bargain collectively (through a trade union or other appropriate
mechanisms). Additionally, it shall not discriminate in respect of any employment
decision against workers on the grounds of their trade union membership.
f) Borrower shall best endeavours to ensure that all subcontractors, including labour-
only contractors, are required to comply with all Environmental, Social Labour and
Governance Laws and with clauses III (d) & (e) related to child labour and freedom of
association.
g) Borrower shall, if required by Bank, finalize an ESG Action Plan, and comply with the
milestones provided therein.
h) Borrower shall deliver to Bank, such information on the [project] as may be
considered necessary or desirable to Bank, and to report on serious incidents within
24 hours (including, without limitation, explosions, any workplace accidents that
12
USFB/MSME-NLD26
result in death, serious or multiple injury, material pollution, or any violent labour
unrest or dispute between the Company and local communities).
i) Borrower shall promptly, [upon receiving [7] days prior notice from Bank,] permit
Bank (through its representatives, delegates or persons nominated by it), to inspect,
examine and audit, the operations, business, and activities of Borrower
4.2 Notwithstanding what has been stated herein or elsewhere, the Lender shall have the
right to review the Loan and/or any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement and/or any
of the Transaction Documents at such intervals as the Lender may deem fit in its absolute
discretion.
5. BORROWER’S REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
5.1 Save and except to the extent already disclosed under this Agreement, the Borrower
hereby represents, warrants and undertakes as follows:
(a) All information furnished by the Borrower to the Lender from time to time, is true and
correct and shall be deemed to form part of the representations and warranties on the basis
of which the Lender has agreed to provide the said Loan. The Borrower shall notify in writing
to the Lender of any circumstances affecting the correctness of any of the particulars provided
by the Borrower to the Lender, immediately on the happening or occurrence of such
circumstance.
(b) There is no litigation/proceedings pending against the Borrower and the Borrower is not
at present aware of any facts likely to give rise to such litigation/proceedings or to material
claims.
(c) The execution on behalf of borrower of this Agreement has been and the execution on
behalf of borrower of the Transaction Documents will be validly authorized and the obligations
expressed as being assumed by the Borrower hereunder and under the Transaction
Documents by the Borrower constitute and will constitute valid legal and binding obligations
of the Borrower enforceable against the Borrower in accordance with their terms.
(d) Neither the execution and delivery hereof and of the Transaction Documents by the
Borrower nor the performance or observance of any of obligations of the Borrower
thereunder shall;
i. conflict with or result in any breach of law, statute, rule, order, trust, agreement or
other instrument, arrangement, obligation or duty by which the Borrower is bound; or
ii. cause any limitation on any of the powers whatsoever of the Borrower howsoever
imposed.
(e) The Borrower has all the requisite legal power and authority to execute this Agreement
and to carry out the terms, conditions and provisions, hereof, and to carry out the terms,
conditions and provisions and the execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Borrower
has been duly authorized by all requisite action, and will not contravene any provision of, or
constitute a default under, any other arrangement or instrument to which it is a part or by
which it or its property may be bound.
(f) The Borrower is not in default under any law, rule, regulation, order, mortgage, trust,
instrument, agreement or other instrument, arrangement, obligation or duty by which the
Borrower is bound.
13
USFB/MSME-NLD26
(g) The Borrower is of good financial standing and in a position to meet its ongoing
obligations and has not been served with (or threatened with) a notice of insolvency or
bankruptcy.
(h) Neither the Borrower nor any of its partners / members / directors / trustees / (as
applicable) have been included in any list of defaulters by any regulatory/statutory authority
and/or banks and/or financial institutions and/or non-banking financial companies etc.
(i) The Borrower has obtained the necessary permissions, sanctions, approvals and consents
for carrying on its business. The said permissions, approvals and consents are in force and
subsisting and the Borrower undertakes to strictly comply with all such permissions.
(j) No Event of Default (as defined hereinafter) or potential Event of Default has occurred
and/or is in existence or continuing.
(k) The Borrower undertakes to the Lender that the Borrower shall make arrangements
satisfactory to the Lender for meeting shortfall, if any, in the resources of the Borrower for
repayment of the said Loan.
(l) The provisions herein contained do not in any manner whatsoever conflict with the
governing document of the Borrower or any judgment, decree or order or any statute, rule or
regulation applicable.
(p) Borrower is in compliance with all laws (including Environmental, Social labour and
Governance Laws) applicable to the Parties.
(q) Borrower is not taking part in or financing any activity, production, use of, trade in,
distribution of, or otherwise involved in any Excluded Activity except that, in the case of
tobacco, the Borrower shall use all reasonable efforts not to provide funding to clients
engaged in such activities and shall ensure that in all events, the Party’s aggregate funding to
such clients shall not at any time exceed two per cent. (2%) of the Party’s total disbursed
portfolio in respect of such Relevant Financing Operations.
(r) [Except to the extent disclosed in writing to Bank], Borrower is not aware of any claims
instituted or threatened against it for breach of any laws (including Environmental, Social and
Governance Laws).
5.2 The Borrower shall be deemed to repeat the representations and warranties contained in
this clause on each day until the date of repayment of the entire amount due hereunder.
5.3 The Borrower does hereby agree, undertake, record, declare, admit, assure, promise,
acknowledge and confirm to abide by, accept, satisfy, fulfill, carry out, perform and comply
fully with all the terms, conditions, requirements, sanctions, provisions and stipulations or any
amendments or modifications therein made or to be made by the Bank at any time or from
time to time in its discretion concerning any of the Loan limits or accounts without any
reference, notice or intimation by the Bank in that behalf.
5.4 The Borrower declares, assures and states that, except as mentioned hereunder, the
Borrower is not a director nor relative^ of any director or none of its directors/partners
/members (if the Borrower is a company/partnership firm) is a director; of the Bank or any
other Banks including Scheduled Co-operative Banks, subsidiaries/trustees of mutual funds/
venture capital funds; and the Borrower is not a relative^ or none of its directors/ partners/
members (if the Borrower is a company/partnership firm) of any Senior Officer # of the Bank
or of any other Banks;
*Applicable in cases where borrower is maintaining savings a/c with Utkarsh Small Finance
Bank Limited.
14
USFB/MSME-NLD26
#The term 'Senior Officer' means an officer of the Bank, who is in equivalent scale as an officer
in senior management level in Grade IV any officer and above in a nationalised bank or any
officer in equivalent scale in the State Bank of India and associate banks and in any banking
company incorporated in India.
^The term "relative" shall mean and include any or all of the following persons: (a) Spouse
(b)Father (c) Mother (including step-mother) (d) Son (including step-son) (e) Son's Wife (f)
Daughter (including step-daughter) (g) Daughter's Husband (h) Brother (including step-
brother) (i) Brother's wife (j) Sister (including step-sister) (k) Sister's husband (l)Brother
(including step-brother) of the spouse (m) Sister (including step-sister) of the spouse. The
Borrower makes the above declaration solemnly and sincerely believing the same to be true
and knowing fully well that on the faith and strength of the correctness thereof the Bank has
agreed to grant the Facility. The Borrower also agrees that it is a condition of the grant of the
facility that if any statement made with reference to the above is found to be false at any time
the Bank shall at liberty and entitled to revoke the facility.
OR
The Borrower declares that the Borrower is related to the director(s) and /or Senior Officer(s)
of the Bank or of any other Banks as specified in schedule "A" hereto:
6. INSPECTION AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION
6.1 Inspection
6.1.1 As from the date of this Agreement and so long as any amount under the Loan remains
outstanding, the Borrower shall permit the Lender and its authorized representatives to carry
out periodical inspection or examine the books of accounts of the Borrower and to have its
offices/ assets inspected from time to time by the officers of the Lender and/or independent
consultant and to carry out technical and legal inspections. Any such representatives of the
Lender shall after giving a reasonable notice to the Borrower, have access to any part of the
Borrower’s premises, godowns, places and to its records, registers and accounts and shall
receive full co-operation and assistance from the Borrower and its employees. The cost of
such inspection, shall be borne and paid by the Borrower on demand and until payment, the
same shall carry interest at the same rate as on defaulted installments in respect of the said
Loan.
6.2 Disclosure of information
6.2.1 The Borrower consents to disclosure by the Lender of information and data relating to
the Borrower, the said Loan, the obligations assumed or to be assumed by the Borrower in
relation to the said Loan and default, if any, committed by the Borrower in discharge thereof
and accordingly:
(a) agrees and consents to the disclosure by the Lender of all or any such information and
data relating to it, the said Loan, and default, if any, committed by it in discharge of such
obligations as the Lender may deem appropriate and necessary to disclose and furnish to
Reserve Bank of India (“RBI”) and to the Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (“CIBIL”) and
any other agency authorized in this behalf by the RBI;
(b) declares that the information and data furnished by it to the Lender is true and correct as
of the date such information and data was provided to the Lender or, where such information
and data relate to a specific date or period, on such date or in respect of such period;
(c) undertakes that RBI, CIBIL and any other agency so authorized may use and process the
said information and data disclosed by the Lender in the manner as deemed fit by them and
15
USFB/MSME-NLD26
furnish for consideration, the processed information and data or products thereof prepared
by them, to banks/financial institutions and other credit grantors or registered users, as may
be specified by the RBI in this behalf.
7. CROSS COLLATERALISATION
Any security(ies) furnished by the Borrower, under any other agreement entered into or to be
entered into with the Lender, shall be deemed to be the security(ies) under this Agreement
and shall not be discharged till such time all the loan(s) are fully discharged to the satisfaction
of the Lender. The Borrower expressly agrees and accepts that in the event of any default
being committed by the Borrower under any other agreement with the Lender, under which
the Borrower is enjoying financial / credit facility, such event, shall be considered as an event
of default occurred under this Agreement and the Lender, shall be absolutely entitled to
exercise all or any of its rights under this Agreement including right to set off in respect of any
amount standing to the credit of the Borrower in any/all of the loans/facility (ies) availed/to be
availed from the Lender.
8. EVENTS OF DEFAULT
8.1 Notwithstanding anything contained herein or in any Transaction Documents executed by
/ to be executed by the Borrower in the Lender’s favour, the Lender shall at its option declare
the said Loan and all of the obligations of the Borrower to the Lender hereunder, immediately
due and payable, after giving a notice of 7 (seven) days to the Borrower, irrespective of any
agreed maturity, upon the happening of any of the following events (“Events of Default”). In
any of the following Events of Default, the lender shall be entitled to demand payment of the
entire amount then outstanding in respect of the said Loan, as if the period for repayment has
expired and shall also be entitled, on failure to pay the interest at the end of each month to
debit it to the Borrower’s accounts and capitalize the amount of such interest as if such
amount was a fresh loan advanced by the Bank to the Borrower and shall be entitled to charge
like interest thereon, in addition to charging penal/additional interest at the rate mentioned in
the Schedule hereunder written from the date of default to the date of payment of entire
overdue amount with interest.
The following event/s, either singly or together shall constitute an Event of Default, that is to
say:
8.1.1 Default in payment by the Borrower of any instalment/s of principal amount, Interest,
commission, service charges, expenses or any other monies due and payable and/or any
amount due under this Agreement, on demand by the Lender;
8.1.2 Any representation or information given by the Borrower in terms of the Agreement,
the Transaction Documents or as may be called upon by the Lender and any representations
or statements, made or deemed to be made, or any undertaking(s) given by the Borrower are
found to be misleading, incorrect or false, materially affecting the continuation of the Loan or
the Borrower commits or threatens to commit any breach or repudiates or threatens to
repudiate or there is default in performance of any other covenant, condition or stipulation on
the part of the Borrower under this Agreement or any Transaction Documents;
8.1.3 Non-submission by the Borrower of any documents or information as may be
reasonably called upon by the Lender to assess and determine that the Borrower is sound
and its operations are conducive to the interest of the Borrower or its creditors;
16
USFB/MSME-NLD26
8.1.4 Any proceeding or imminent threat of proceeding initiated against the Borrower, by any
party under laws of insolvency or under any other statutory provision(s) or law(s) applicable
to the Borrower which may lead to its declaration as insolvent or bankrupt;
8.1.5 The Borrower is or becomes unable to pay its debts
8.1.6 If any attachment, distress, execution or other process is enforced, initiated or levied
upon the Borrower or its properties or a receiver is appointed in respect any property /assets
of the Borrower;
8.1.7 If there is a failure in business, commission of an act of bankruptcy, general assignment
for the benefit of creditors, if the Borrower suspends payment to any creditors or threatens to
do so, any petition in bankruptcy of by, or against the Borrower is filed;
8.1.8 A receiver or liquidator is appointed or allowed to be appointed in respect of the
Borrower;
8.1.9 If any Governmental or other statutory and regulatory authorities license, approval,
authorization, consent or exception, required to enable the Borrower to perform any of its
obligations under this Agreement, is withdrawn or modified or if it becomes unlawful for the
Borrower to perform any of its obligations under this Agreement, or if the management of the
undertaking or the business of the Borrower is taken over or the Borrower suspends or ceases
to carry on all or a material part of its business;
8.1.10 If the Borrower opts to discontinue his/their profession or close down his/their
business/trade for any reason whatsoever;
8.1.11 If there is a material adverse effect on the Borrower’s business operations or
constitution or in its future business prospects, either on account of threatened, potential or
actual, material disputes, litigation or legal process, change in regulatory or other financial
provisions, alienation of its properties or assets by any means, imposition of any
administrative or investigative actions by statutory or other regulatory authorities;
8.1.12 A moratorium, standstill, or similar suspension of payments in respect of the
indebtedness, whether internal or external, of the Borrower, has been or may in the
reasonably foreseeable future be declared by the government, RBI or any other governmental
agency of the Borrower or the Lender;
8.1.13 Cross Default
8.1.14 (a) If the Borrower defaults or threatens to default in discharging its liability, under any
other agreement or other writing between the Borrower and the Lender, or under any other
agreement with the other creditors, or in the performance of any covenant, term or
undertaking thereunder, or
(b) If the Borrower suspends or threatens to suspend any payment to any creditor when due
or any creditor of the Borrower becomes entitled to declare any sums due and payable prior
to the date on which it would otherwise have become due, or
(c) any guarantee or indemnity or collateral given or other support agreement entered into
by the Borrower is not honoured when due and called upon; or
(d) any financial indebtedness including any money borrowed or raised, receivables sold or
discounted or any other transaction entered into by the Borrower having the commercial
effect of borrowing or any guarantee or indemnity given by the Borrower (hereinafter together
collectively referred to as “financial indebtedness”) is/are not paid when due nor within any
originally applicable grace period; or (e) any commitment for any financial indebtedness of
17
USFB/MSME-NLD26
the Borrower is cancelled or suspended by a creditor as a result of an event of default
(howsoever described);
8.1.15 If the financial institutions and/or banks with whom the Borrower has entered into or
shall be entering into agreements for financial assistance have refused to disburse the moneys
or any part thereof, or have recalled the same under their respective agreements with the
Borrower, or there is any deterioration in the Borrower’s credit rating;
8.1.16 The Borrower causes to undertake any action, event or step, which directly or
indirectly, causes any change in the representations and warranties made by the Borrower
under this Agreement or any other Transaction Documents without the prior written approval
of the Lender, or there are any circumstances which in the sole judgment of the Lender are
prejudicial to the interest of the Lender;
8.1.17 If the Borrower dissolves or ceases or threatens to discontinue or carry on its business;
8.1.18 If the Borrower commits a breach of or default under any of the Transaction
Documents;
8.1.19 If the Borrower fails to comply with any of the conditions and/or covenants stipulated
in this Agreement;
8.1.20 If the Borrower fails to create the Security or give Security Cheques/ SI/ NACH or submit
additional documents to the Lender as provided herein;
8.1.21 If the Borrower fails to sign and execute such documents, papers, writing or such
additional documents, papers or writing as required and called upon within 10 days from the
date of intimation by the Lender during the tenure of this Agreement, till the time all amounts
hereunder are repaid to the satisfaction of the Lender;
8.1.22 If any circumstance or event occurs which in the opinion of the Lender is prejudicial to
or impairs or imperils or jeopardizes or is likely to prejudice, impair, imperil, or jeopardize or
adversely affect in any manner, the ability/ capacity of the Borrower to perform or comply
with its obligations hereunder to repay the Loan;
8.1.23 Any change taking place in the ownership or control of the Borrower whereby the
effective beneficial ownership or control of the Borrower will change or any material change
in the management of the business of the Borrower;
8.1.24 If the Loan amount or any part thereof is utilized for any purpose other than the Purpose
for which it is sanctioned by the Lender;
8.1.25 If any extra-ordinary circumstances shall have occurred, which shall make it impossible
for the Borrower to fulfill any of its obligations hereunder.
8.1.26. There exist any circumstances which in the opinion of the Lender prejudicially affects
or may affect the Lender’s interest or the Borrower’s ability to repay the Loan.
8.1.27. Demise of the Borrower of if the Borrower compounds with its creditors or permits
any attachment or sequestrations or other processes against any of its assets or properties.
8.1.28. If in the opinion of the Lender, the Borrower is unable to service the Loan.
On the question whether any of the above events/circumstances has occurred/ happened, the
decision of the Bank shall be final, conclusive and binding on the Borrower.
8.2 Consequences of default
8.2.1 The Borrower agrees and acknowledges that the following consequences shall forthwith
ensue upon the occurrence of an Event of Default:
(a) Repayment of the Loan shall be accelerated and all amounts due including the entire
amount of the Loan outstanding and all accrued Interest due thereon, irrespective of schedule
18
USFB/MSME-NLD26
of repayment shall become forthwith payable by the Borrower to the Lender and nothing
herein contained shall be deemed to affect or prejudice the rights or powers of the Lender to
demand repayment of the Loan and all monies due and payable by the Borrower under this
Agreement;
(b) In addition to the above, the Lender shall be entitled to adopt criminal and/ or civil
proceedings against the Borrower, including but not limited to for dishonour of cheques under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
(c) The Lender shall be entitled, without any prior or further notice to disclose to the Reserve
Bank of India, Credit Information Bureau (India)Ltd. or any other authority or any other third
person, the name/identity of the Borrower and the fact of the Borrower having committed the
act of default with full details thereof.
Nothing herein contained shall prejudice any other security, present or future or any right or
remedy available to the Bank against the Borrower, their partners or other persons liable to
pay or contribute towards the recovery of the moneys due by the Borrower to the Bank
hereunder.
9. BANKERS’ LIEN / SET OFF /RIGHT TO DEBIT
9.1 The rights, powers and remedies given to the Lender by this Agreement shall be in
addition to all rights, powers and remedies given to the Lender by virtue of any other security,
statute or rule of law. The Lender may exercise a banker’s lien or right of set-off against all
monies and other property of the Borrower and documents now or hereafter in the possession
of or on deposit with the Lender, whether held in a general or special account or deposit, or
for safe keeping or otherwise; and every such lien and right of set off may be exercised
without demand upon or notice to the Borrower with respect to any obligation of the Borrower
to the Lender in the same manner as if the obligation were unsecured and shall have a lien on
all property / credit balance in any other account of the Borrower or securities of the Borrower
in the Lender’s possession or custody whether for safe-keeping or otherwise. If upon demand
by the Lender, the amounts due under the Loan are not repaid within the prescribed time,
then credit balance in any account of the Borrower may be adjusted towards the amounts
due. In case of any deficit, the deficit amount may be recovered by the Lender from the
Borrower.
9.2 The Bank shall be entitled at any time and from time to time without any notice, reference
or intimation to the Borrower and without the Borrower’s consent to adjust, appropriate or
set off any credit balance or any part thereof due or to become due to the Borrower in any of
Borrower’s current, savings, term deposit or any deposit account or any account whatsoever
at any of the Bank’s branches in the Borrower’s name with or without joint names of any other
persons or before or after the maturity dates thereof towards satisfaction or part satisfaction
of outstanding dues. Notwithstanding the Bank’s decision / action / policy, if any, to reverse
any debit entry or not to debit interest or not to make any debit entry in Bank’s books or in
ledger account or in statement of account or any account, for any period whatsoever, the
Borrower shall be bound and liable to pay jointly and severally to the Bank, the entire
outstanding, debit balance and compound interest thereon with monthly rests till the date of
realization, recovery or collection by the Bank of all such amounts plus interest, penal interest,
interest tax, additional interest, liquidated damages, commission, costs, charges and
expenses at such rates as may be prevailing or fixed or to be fixed by the Bank from time to
time without any reference, notice or intimation by the Bank at any time whatsoever.
19
USFB/MSME-NLD26
9.3 The Securities created hereunder or under any other credit facilities provided by the
Lender to the Borrower under any other agreements shall continue to secure the deficit
without prejudice to the right of the Lender to demand immediate repayment of the amounts
due from time to time under the Loan in terms of this Agreement. If any Interest remains
unpaid on the date it is due and payable then all the unpaid Interest on the due date, at the
option of the Lender shall be debited on the due date from the account of the Borrower at any
of its branches in India.
10. CANCELLATION AND TERMINATION
The Lender may, in its sole discretion cancel and terminate the Loan and recall the entire
amount due, without any prior intimation to the Borrower, if in the opinion of the Lender, any
Event of Default has occurred or is likely to occur, or if it becomes unlawful for the Lender to
disburse or continue the Loan to the Borrower or if it becomes unlawful for the Borrower to
comply with any of its obligations under any of the Transaction Documents. The
disbursement having been made by the Lender, the Borrower shall not be entitled to cancel
and/or terminate this Agreement.
As regards the Borrower, this Agreement shall be in full force and effect and shall not be
terminated till the Loan account is closed and all outstanding thereon satisfied in full, nor shall
it be treated as merged into, or modified or altered due to execution of any other documents
hereafter.
11. LENDER’S RIGHT TO ASSIGN
The Borrower shall not assign or transfer any of its rights, duties or obligations under this
Agreement except with the prior written permission of the Lender. The Borrower expressly
recognizes and accepts that the Lender shall be absolutely entitled and shall have full power
and authority to sell, assign or transfer by novation or otherwise, in any manner, in whole or
in part this Agreement/Transaction Documents, and in such manner and on such terms as the
Lender may decide, (including reserving a right to the Lender to retain its power thereunder
to proceed against the Borrower on behalf of the purchaser, assignee or transferee) and any
or all outstanding dues of the Borrower to any third party of the Lender’s choice without any
further reference or intimation to the Borrower. Any such action and any such sale,
assignment or transfer shall bind the Borrower to accept such third party as creditor
exclusively or as a joint creditor with the Lender as the case may be.
12. WAIVER
12.1 No implied waiver or impairment
12.1.1 No delay or omission of the Lender in exercising any right, power or remedy accruing
to the Lender upon any default hereunder or under any Transaction Documents shall impair
any such right, power or remedy or be construed to be a waiver thereof or any acquiescence
in such default, nor shall the action or inaction of the Lender in respect of any default or any
acquiescence by it in any default, affect or impair any right, power or remedy of the Lender in
respect of any other defaults, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such right, power
or remedy preclude any further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, power or
remedy. The rights and remedies of the Lender herein provided are cumulative and not
20
USFB/MSME-NLD26
exclusive of any rights or remedies provided by law, in equity, or in any of the other
documents.
12.2 Express Waiver
12.2.1 A waiver or consent granted by the Lender under this Agreement will be effective only
if given in writing and then only in the instance and for the purpose for which it is given.
13. AMENDMENT
The Lender shall have the right to withdraw/modify all/any of the sanction conditions or
stipulate fresh conditions under intimation to the Borrower. This Agreement and any other
documents referred to herein, integrate all the terms and conditions mentioned herein or
incidental hereto, and supersede all oral negotiations and prior writings in respect of the
subject matter hereof, except for those provisions of the sanction letters, agreements, security
documents (if any) issued or executed prior to this Agreement which are in addition to and
complement to, and are not the same or in conflict with, the terms of this Agreement.
14. RECORDS
The Lender has a right to hold all the Transaction Documents and any other information
exchanged between the Lender and the Borrower under this Agreement even after expiry or
termination of this Agreement or for such period as may be specified from time to time for
fulfilling any regulatory/ internal policy obligations/ guidelines including Anti-Money
Laundering related requirements.
15. NOTICES
Any demand or notice to be made or given to the Borrower may be made or given by leaving
the same at or posting the same by post in an envelope under certificate of posting addressed
to the Borrower at their place of business, residence or office and every such demand or
notice shall be deemed to be received as the case may be at the time at which it is left or at
the time at which it should have been delivered in the ordinary course of post.
16. HEADINGS
The headings of the clauses are inserted for convenience of reference only and shall not be
deemed to affect the construction of the provisions of this Agreement.
17. PROVISIONS SEVERABLE
Every provision contained in this Agreement shall be severable and distinct from every other
such provision and if at any time any one or more of such provisions is or becomes invalid,
illegal or unenforceable in any respect under any law, the validity, legality and enforceability
of the remaining provisions hereof shall not be in any way affected or impaired thereby.
18. GOVERNING LAW & JURISDICTION
18.1 This Agreement and the Transaction Documents shall be governed by the laws of India.
The Parties hereto expressly agree that all disputes arising out of and/or relating to the Loan,
, this Agreement and the other Transaction Documents including the recovery of the loan
amount and the interest amount along with such costs, expenses, charges etc. by the Lender
shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts and tribunals of the city/place in
21
USFB/MSME-NLD26
which the branch of the Bank from where the disbursement has been made is situated,
provided that the exclusivity aforesaid shall bind the Borrower and the Bank shall be entitled
to pursue the same in any other court and/or tribunal of competent jurisdiction at any other
place. The Bank shall be entitled to refer the dispute to the Debts Recovery Tribunal under the
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 , where applicable.
The Borrower hereby confirms that where the applicable jurisdiction is not the Debt Recovery
Tribunal under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993, in
such event, the disputes, differences, claims between the Parties hereto arising out of this
Agreement, including any disputes with regard to the recovery of the Loan amount including
the interest amount the same shall be referred to the sole arbitrator duly appointed by the
Bank. The arbitration shall be held in accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996 or any statutory modification or re-enactment thereof. The arbitration shall be conducted
at Varanasi or Mumbai or ___________
. The language to be used in the arbitral proceedings shall be English. The arbitration award
shall be final and binding on all of the Parties.
19. RELATIONSHIP
The relationship between the Lender and the Borrower as lender and borrower shall
commence from the date of this Agreement and subsist until all monies due and payable by
the Borrower to the Lender under this Agreement and in all other documents pursuant hereto
shall have been fully paid to and received by the Lender.
All rights and powers conferred on the Lender by this Agreement shall be in addition and
supplemental to any rights the Lender has as a creditor against the Borrower under any law
for the time being in force and shall not be in derogation thereof.
20. INCONSISTENCY
This Agreement shall always be read with the Schedule hereunder written, Sanction Letter
and all other agreements and documents executed or to be executed by the Parties hereto
and interpreted accordingly. It is expressly agreed that the other Transaction Documents shall
be read as part and parcel of this Agreement and all such covenants, stipulations and
obligations as are required to be performed or observed by the Borrower in pursuance of the
other Transaction Documents and all such powers and rights as are conferred upon the
Lender thereunder shall be deemed to be set out, required or conferred by this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed on the day,
month and year as mentioned in the schedule.
22
USFB/MSME-NLD26
SCHEDULE – FACT SHEET
Sr.No. Particulars Details
1. Place of Agreement
2. Date of Agreement
3. Name of the Borrower
4. Name of the Co-Borrower/s
5. Pan No. of the Borrower/Co-borrower a) Borrower-
b) Co-borrower -
6. Address of the Borrower and for the
purpose of service of Notices
7. Address of the Co-borrower and for the
purpose of service of Notices
8. Address of the Branch Office of Utkarsh
Small Finance Bank Limited and for the
purpose of service of Notices
9. Type of Loan
10. Loan Amount and Number of Tranches
11. Nature of Business/Profession
12. Purpose of Loan
13. Date and details of Sanction Letter
14. Tenure of the Loan
15.
Interest type (fixed or floating)#
(a) Interest chargeable# (In case of Floating
Rate Loans)
(a) Not Applicable
(b) Interest chargeable# (In case of Fixed
Rate Loans)
(b) ............% p.a
16. Date of reset of interest Not Applicable
17. Mode of communication of changes in
interest rates
Bank Website/Letter/Email/SMS sent to the
address of correspondence/Email
ID/Contact Number as updated in bank
records.
18.
Fees payable*
a. On application
a) Processing Fee ........% of loan amount
at the time of disbursal
b) Documentation fees……...(if any)
23
USFB/MSME-NLD26
c) Agreement franking charges as per
actuals
b. During the term of the Loan
a) Duplicate Interest and Principal
Certificate - ₹250
c) Repayment Instrument Bounce charges
- ₹300
d) Credit Bureau Report charges - ₹50
e) Duplicate no due certificate / NOC-₹250
c. On foreclosure/ Pre Closure As per Sanction Letter
d. On pre-payment As per Sanction Letter
e. Fees refundable if Loan not
sanctioned/disbursed
Not applicable
f. Conversion charges for switching from
floating to fixed interest and vice-versa
Not applicable
g. Penalty for delayed payments/ Additional
Interest
2% per month on the Overdue EMI +
Applicable taxes.
h. Other Charges As provided in the Sanction Letter
19. Other Conditions
20. Disbursal Instalments (if applicable)
21. Maximum part prepayment allowed As per Sanction Letter
23. EMI payable /Repayment Schedule
24. Date of commencement of Repayment
25. Due Date of repayment (Loan with No
Moratorium)
25. A Frequency of Repayment Monthly in the form of Equated Monthly
Instalment (EMI)
26. Loan Facility with Moratorium
26. A Nature of Moratorium
(Principal/Interest/Both Principal and
Interest Moratorium)
26. B Date of commencement of Interest or
Principal Repayment in case of Loan with
Moratorium
26. C Date of EMI Start in case of Loan with
Principal/Interest/Both Moratorium
24
USFB/MSME-NLD26
26. D Due Date of repayment (Loan with
Principal/Interest/Both Moratorium)
26. E Frequency of Repayment
27. Mode of Repayment NACH/SI
28. No. of Advance EMI (if applicable)**
29. Advance EMI amount (if applicable)**
30. Date of EMI
31. NPA/SMA Classification: -
SMA
Subcategories
Basis for classification – Principal or interest payment or
any other amount wholly or partly overdue
SMA-0 Upto 30 days
SMA-1 More than 30 days and up to 60 days
SMA-2 More than 60 days and up to 90 days
NPA 0n 90th Day of Loan becoming overdue
Example: If due date of a loan account is March 31, 2021, and full dues are not
received before the bank runs the day-end process for this date, the date of overdue
shall be March 31, 2021. If it continues to remain overdue, then this
account shall get tagged as SMA-0 until April 30, 2021 i.e. up to 30 days of being
continuously overdue.
Subsequently the account shall get tagged as SMA-1 upon running day-end process
on April 30, 2021 i.e. upon completion of 30 days of being continuously overdue.
Accordingly, the date of SMA-1 classification for that account shall be April 30, 2021.
Similarly, if the account continues to remain overdue, it shall get tagged as SMA2 upon
running day-end process on May 30, 2021 and if continues to remain overdue further, it
shall get classified as NPA upon running day-end process on June 29, 2021.
32. Insurance Premium (if applicable)
33. Date on which annual outstanding balance
statement will be issued
On demand by the Borrower
* Applicable taxes extra for all fees and charges
** Advance EMI Amount (where applicable) shall be treated as Collateral and shall be adjusted
towards payments of the last few instalments of the loan or overdue charges where
applicable.
The Bank shall not pay any interest on the advance instalment amount.
25
USFB/MSME-NLD26
SIGNED AND DELIVERED BY
Individual:
Mr./Ms._____________________________________the Borrower within-named
Mr./Ms.______________________the Co-borrower within-named
Partnership Firm:
Mr./Ms._____________________________________________________________________________
Mr./Ms._____________________________________________________________________________
Mr./Ms._____________________________________________________________________________
All partners of M/s.____________________________________________________________________
the Borrower within-named
Sole Proprietary Firm:
Mr./Ms._____________________________________________________________Sole
Proprietor/Proprietress of M/s.______________________________________________________
the Borrower within-named
Signed, sealed and delivered by
Mr…………. and Mr. -----------, pursuant to an Authorisation / Resolution of its Board of
Trustees / Managing Committee of the said Trust passed in that behalf
on the ____________day of _______ 20---
Limited Company:
FOR __________________________________ ]
______________________________________ ]
through its Authorised ]
Signatory/ies Mr. _______________________ ] and
Mr._______________________________ ] (Name of Authorised
Signatory & Designation) ]
##Or
THE ##COMMON SEAL of the Borrower ------------------
Limited has pursuant to the Resolutions of its Board of
Directors passed on ________ day of _____________
hereunto been affixed in the presence Shri
___________________, Managing Director/ Director who
has signed these presents in token thereof and Shri -------
26
USFB/MSME-NLD26
--------, Authorised Person, who has also signed these
presents in token thereof.
1. Signature : 2. Signature :
Name : Name :
Address : Address :
(##APPLICABLE ONLY IN CASE ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION STATES THAT COMMON SEAL
AFFIXATION IS REQUIRED IN LOAN DOCUMENTS)
SIGNED AND DELIVERED BY the within-named
Utkarsh Small Finance Bank Limited, by the hands of
_________________________________________
Authorized Signatory

CREDIT CARD AGREEMENT & DISCLOSURE STATEMENT G-17005
This Agreement applies to the VISA and/or MasterCard credit Card and Credit Devices issued to
you by TIB The Independent BankersBank, N.A., Georgia Branch, although the name on your Card
may be that of a different financial institution. Any Card or Credit Device issued to you by us
remains our property and must be returned to us or to anyone we designate, upon request. Retaining,
signing or using, or permitting others to use, the Card or Credit Device shall constitute the
equivalent of signing this Agreement and such retaining, signing or using means you agree to be
bound by the terms of this Agreement. The Application you submitted for the Account is hereby
incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement. This Agreement begins on the earlier of (i) the
date you sign or otherwise submit an Application that is approved by us or (ii) the first date you or
someone authorized by you uses the Account in a transaction that we approve (in NY, the first date
you or someone authorized by you signs a sales slip or memorandum or the first date that another
document is issued to you or someone authorized by you as evidence of a transaction on the Account
that we approve).
Definitions. In addition to other terms that may be defined in this Agreement, the following terms
when used in this Agreement have the following definitions:
1. "Account" means the open-end revolving credit account established pursuant to your
Application and this Agreement to which charges are posted based on use of a Card,
information from a Card, Credit Device, or any other device or procedure by which the
Account may be accessed in the future.
2. "Agreement" means this Credit Card Agreement plus the Disclosure Statement, which is
contained in the same envelope as, and folded together with, this Credit Card Agreement and
which provides information on the periodic rate, the Annual Percentage Rate (APR), the
Interest Charge and balance on which it is determined, any Other Charges, cash advance fees,
balance transfer fees, and any grace period applicable to the Account. The Disclosure
Statement is incorporated herein by reference as if repeated verbatim herein. If any provision
of this Credit Card Agreement is inconsistent with any provision of the Disclosure Statement,
the provision of the Disclosure Statement controls.
3. "Application" means the application for credit you completed and returned to the Sponsoring
Bank to request that we extend credit to you under the Account.
4. "Authorized User" means any person you permit to use the Account or who has apparent
authority to use the Account.
5. "Card" means the VISA and/or MasterCard credit card(s) issued to you by us, and any future
credit card(s) issued to you in connection with the Account. If you applied for more than one
type of Card, this Agreement is a separate Agreement for each Card.
6. “Cash Advance” means the amount requested by you and advanced to you by any method
approved by us according to the terms of this Agreement in cash or cash equivalent items
(including, but not limited to, money orders, travelers checks, lottery tickets, casino chips,
vouchers redeemable for cash, or racetrack wagers).
7. “Cash Advance Limit” means (i) ten percent (10%) of the Credit Limit for business use
accounts and (ii) 50 percent (50%) of the Credit Limit for consumer use accounts.
8. "Credit Device" means any device such as a blank check, payee-designated check,
"convenience" or "special" check, blank draft or other order, or any other device or item
which may, at our discretion and pursuant to procedures we may adopt from time to time, be
issued by us to you to access the Account.
9. "Credit Limit" means the total dollar amount of the Account which we approved and which
you may borrow against according to the terms of this Agreement.
10. "Index" means the Prime Rate (the base rate on corporate loans posted by at least 70% of the
10 largest U.S. banks) published in the Wall Street Journal on the 25th day of each month or
the business day preceding the 25th day if that day falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Changes in the Index will take
effect beginning with the first billing cycle in the month following a change in the Index.
Increases or decreases in the Index will cause the APR and periodic rate to fluctuate, resulting
in increased or decreased Interest Charges on the Account.
11. “Other Charges” means the charges listed in the section of this Agreement with such
caption.
12. "We," "us," and "our" mean TIB The Independent BankersBank, N.A., Georgia Branch, 1550
N. Brown Road, Suite 150, Lawrenceville, Georgia 30043.
13. "You" and "your" refer to each person who signed an application for the Account, each
person who signs or uses the Card or a Credit Device, and any Authorized User.
Purchases, Cash Advances and Balance Transfers; Cash Advance Limit. You request and
authorize us to extend credit to you under the Account as follows: (1) goods and services may be
purchased or leased by use of the Card from any seller or vendor who honors the Card
("Purchases"); (2) "Cash Advances" may be obtained up to, but not in excess of, the Cash Advance
Limit (a) when you complete a written request on a form furnished to you by us or any other
financial institution we approve; (b) using the Card at any automatic teller machine which accepts
the Card; or (c) using a Credit Device to pay for Purchases or, when allowed, to receive cash. (3)
“Balance Transfers” may be obtained when you complete a request. We are not responsible for any
person or entity refusing to accept the Card or any Credit Device for Purchases or Cash Advances.
Promise to Pay. You promise to pay us for all Purchases made by you and for all Cash Advances
and Balance Transfers received by you except as limited in this Agreement regarding your liability
for unauthorized use of a Card or Credit Device. You shall be jointly and severally liable for all
amounts due from you under this Agreement for Purchases, Cash Advances, Balance Transfers,
Interest Charges, and Other Charges.
Special Checks. If Special Checks are issued from time to time for use with your Account, you
may obtain what is deemed to be a Cash Advance under the Account by writing a check. Each
Special Check must be in a form we have issued to you and must be imprinted with your name and
the Account number. Special Checks may be used only by a person whose name is printed on the
Check and must be completed and signed in the same way as a regular personal check. You agree
not to use your Special Checks to purchase or carry securities or to pay amounts you owe us under
this Agreement. We are not obligated to pay a Special Check (a) if your resulting Account balance
would exceed the Credit Limit, (b) if the Check is dated more than 6 months before it was presented
to us for payment, (c) if a Special Check or Card has been reported lost or stolen, (d) if you are in
default under this Agreement or a loan agreement with another lender, (e) if you or we have
terminated your ability to receive further credit under this Agreement, (f) if you are insolvent, or (g)
if your Card has expired. The amount of each Special Check paid by us, even if we are not obligated
to pay it, will be a Cash Advance. Checks paid by us will not be returned to you with your monthly
billing statement, but information about them will appear on such statement. You agree you will
promptly review your monthly billing statement to discover any unauthorized or altered Special
Checks. You cannot put a stop-payment order on a Special Check.
Refunds and Adjustments. Any refund, adjustment, or credit allowed by any seller or other person
or entity shall not be by cash but rather by a credit to the Account appearing on your monthly billing
statement.
Monthly Billing Statements. Each month we will send you a monthly billing statement reflecting
all Purchases, Cash Advances, Balance Transfers, Interest Charges and Other Charges pursuant to
this Agreement for the prior monthly period. Such statements shall be deemed correct and accepted
by you unless you notify us to the contrary in writing within 60 days of our mailing such statement
to you.
Payments on the Account. Your payment under the Account must be made on or before the
"Payment Due Date" reflected on your monthly billing statement. Your payment must be either the
full amount billed or, at your option, an installment equal to at least the required "Minimum
Payment Due" stated on the billing statement. The minimum payment will equal the "New Balance"
shown on your statement if that amount is less than $25. If the New Balance exceeds $25, the
minimum payment will equal the greater of 3% of the New Balance or $25, plus the entire portion of
the New Balance in excess of your Credit Limit, plus any amount past due.
Payments must be made in U.S. dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. Transactions in foreign currencies
will be converted to U.S. dollars at the exchange rate used at the time of the conversion. The
conversion may occur after the transaction date and the conversion rate may differ from the rate of
exchange in effect at the time of the transaction. You agree to pay the converted amount to us in
U.S. dollars, plus any charge for the conversion or processing that may be imposed.
All payments on the account must be made at the address shown on your monthly billing statement
and are considered to have been made on the date received at that address. If payment is made at
any location other than the designated address, credit for such payment may be delayed for up to 5
days. As allowed by law, we may accept payments marked "payment in full" (or words of similar
intent) without losing any of our rights to collect the full balance due under the Account and this
Agreement. We will apply your payments to the unpaid balance of the Account in the order and
manner we decide, in our sole discretion.
Late Payments and Increase in Rate. If you allow your Account to become 60 days past due, we
may increase your APR on all balances to a higher rate equal to the Index plus a margin of 15.99%
up to a maximum of 21%. This means if you fail to at least pay your required minimum monthly
payment for the periods stated above, your APR may increase; however, if your Rate is increased,
your Account may become eligible for a lower APR if you make timely payments for three
consecutive months.
Payment Holidays. At our option we may permit you from time to time to skip making the
Minimum Payment Due for a specified billing cycle (referred to as a "payment holiday"). Even if
you accept such a payment holiday, we will continue to assess Interest Charges on the unpaid
balance of the Account as disclosed in the Insert. Any payment holiday we permit will not affect the
terms of this Agreement. The terms of this Agreement remain in force regardless of whether you
accept a payment holiday.
Credit Limit; Cash Advance Limit. You agree not to use or permit others to use the Card,
information from the Card, or a Credit Device if such use would cause either (i) the balance of the
Account to exceed the Credit Limit we set from time to time or (ii) the balance of the outstanding
Cash Advances to exceed the Cash Advance Limit applicable to such Credit Limit. The initial
Credit Limit for the Account is shown on the material accompanying the Card before the Account is
used and will also be disclosed on each monthly billing statement for the Account. We may, at our
option, extend credit under the Account which exceeds the Credit Limit or the Cash Advance Limit.
If we do, you agree to immediately pay the excess which we advanced to you over either of the
applicable limits. We are not obligated to allow any Purchase, Cash Advance or Balance Transfer
which will exceed your Credit Limit or Cash Advance Limit, and if we do, we are not obligated to
do so at a later time. You agree we may change your Credit Limit (which will automatically also
change your Cash Advance Limit) or cancel the Account if you exceed the Credit Limit or the Cash
Advance Limit.
Transactions Made in Foreign Currencies. If a transaction is made in a foreign currency, we and
MasterCard International or VISA International, depending on which card is used, will convert the
transaction into a U.S. dollar amount. MasterCard and VISA will act in accordance with their
operating regulations or conversion procedures in effect at the time the transaction is processed.
Currently, their regulations and procedures provide that the currency conversion rate they use, to
determine the transaction amount in U.S. dollar, is either (a) a wholesale market rate, or (b) a
government-mandated rate in effect one day prior to the processing date. MasterCard and VISA
increase this conversion rate by one percent (1%) and keep this increase as compensation for
performing the currency conversion service. We will charge you two percent (2%) of the U.S. dollar
amount of the transaction converted from a foreign currency. The currency conversion rate
calculated in this manner that is in effect on the processing date may differ from the rate in effect on
the transaction date or posting date.
Other Charges. You agree we may assess, in addition to the Interest Charge, the Other Charges
below which charges will be earned when assessed and are not subject to refund or rebate. The
following fees may be added, as applicable, to the Account and treated as a Purchase as indicated on
the Insert:
1. Annual Fee. A non-refundable annual membership fee may be charged to the Account during
the month following issuance or re-issuance of the Card and will be posted annually on the
anniversary date of the opening of the Account. The annual membership fee is not refundable
even if the Account is closed for any reason by either you or us, and the fee is a condition of
maintaining the Account whether or not you use the Account by making Purchases or
receiving Cash Advances.
2. Late Fee. If the minimum required payment is not received by the Payment Due Date for that
billing cycle, we may assess a $25 late charge on the Account.
3. Returned Payment Fee. We will charge you $25 for each return by a bank or other depository
institution of a dishonored check, negotiable order of withdrawal or share draft issued by you
to us in connection with the Account. This fee will be in addition to all other Interest Charges
and Other Charges we may collect from you and is not subject to refund or rebate.
4. Cash Advance Fee. If you request a Cash Advance, in addition to the Interest Charge which
will accrue on the Cash Advance, you agree to pay a fee of three percent (3%) of the amount
of the Cash Advance subject to a minimum fee of $10.00.
5. Balance Transfer Fee. If you request a Balance Transfer, in addition to the Interest Charge
which will accrue on the balance transfer, you agree to pay a fee of three percent (3%) of the
amount of the Balance Transfer subject to a minimum fee of $10.00
6. Pay-by-Phone. If you request an agent assisted payment be made to your Account through an
electronic funds transfer, you agree to pay a fee of $10 in addition to the amount of the
payment.
7. International Transactions Fee. Two percent (2%) of the U.S. dollar amount of the
transaction converted from a foreign currency.
8. Supplemental Convenience Requests. If you request supplemental copies of billing
statements, you will be charged $5 for each. We will not assess you this fee if you request a
billing statement for a billing error/inquiry that you may assert against us under applicable
law. If you request expedited delivery of a Card, you will be charged $25. If you make any
other Supplemental Convenience Requests, you agree to pay our reasonable charges for such
request in effect at that time.
Termination; Default. We may reduce the Credit Limit or terminate your ability to receive further
credit under this Agreement at any time without notice. You may terminate your ability to receive
further credit under this Agreement by giving us notice of termination and returning to us all Cards
and Credit Devices. Termination by you will be effective on the date we receive written notice from
you along with the Cards and Credit Devices (unless they are lost or stolen, in which case you agree
to sign an affidavit to that effect and stating that no credit received after the date of loss or theft was
authorized by you).
You will be in default under this Agreement if any of the following events occur: (1) you fail to
make the required payment when due; (2) you fail to perform or abide by any of your agreements or
obligations under this Agreement or any other loan agreement you have with us; (3) you become
insolvent (meaning your liabilities exceed your assets or you are unable to pay your debts as they
become due); (4) any action is taken by or against you under any bankruptcy or insolvency laws; (5)
any attachment or garnishment proceedings are initiated against you; (6) you die or are declared
incompetent; (7) we, in good faith, believe the prospect of your payment or performance under this
Agreement is impaired; or (8) you fail or refuse to provide current financial information to us when
we request it.
On any termination or default, regardless of any unused credit you may have under the Account, all
amounts you owe under the Account and this Agreement will become immediately due and payable
in full. You must also return to us all Cards and Credit Devices issued to you in connection with the
Account. Termination or default shall not release you from any obligation you have incurred under
this Agreement. After termination or default, your obligations and our rights under this Agreement
shall remain effective until the entire outstanding balance of the Account is paid in full.
Attorneys Fees and Costs. To the extent permitted by law, you agree to pay our attorneys fees and
other costs we incur if you are in default and we hire an attorney who is not our salaried employee to
collect amounts you owe under the Account and this Agreement. Amounts you owe for attorneys'
fees will be added to the outstanding balance of the Account as a Purchase whether or not your right
to receive credit has terminated or you are in default.
Amendment to this Agreement. This Agreement, and the terms of the Account, may be amended
by us if we send you written notice of the amendment prior to its effective date as required by law.
As of the amendment's effective date, the change in terms will apply to the entire outstanding
balance of the Account as well as Purchases made and Cash Advances and Balance Transfers
received after the effective date of the amendment. If you do not agree to the amendment, your only
option is termination under this Agreement.
Venue and Jurisdiction of Lawsuits. The parties agree, consent and contract that the venue and
jurisdiction of any lawsuit brought by TIBThe Independent BankersBank, N.A. to enforce this
agreement or collect any sum or sums of money due and owing under this agreement shall be in
Dallas County, Texas or any county contiguous to Dallas County, Texas.
The parties further agree that any action or cross action brought by a cardholder against TIB The
Independent BankersBank, N.A. regarding this contractual agreement shall be brought in Dallas
County, Texas or any county contiguous to Dallas County, Texas.
Governing Law; Severability. You agree that your obligations under this Agreement represented
by charges to the Account are contracted for and become binding when the sales drafts, credit card
slips, or other Credit Devices are accepted by us and we cause the holders of the same to be paid.
You agree that these events occur in Georgia. This Agreement is subject to federal law and, to the
extent not preempted by federal law, the laws of the State of Georgia (except to the extent that this
Agreement can and does vary from such rules or laws), without regard to conflict of laws principals.
If any provision of this Agreement conflicts with the law, you agree the provision will be viewed as
if it was amended to comply with the law. If that is not possible, then only the provision that
conflicts with the law will be deleted. The remaining provisions of this Agreement will remain
effective.
Credit Reports. You agree that we may obtain consumer credit reports from one or more credit
reporting agencies or others in connection with opening or maintaining the Account, increasing the
Credit Limit under the Account, or making any extension of credit to you under the Account. We
may also ask you for additional information in connection with the Account and request credit
reports to verify your current credit standing. You agree that we may release information to others,
such as credit reporting agencies, regarding the status and history of the Account. However, we are
not obligated to release any such information unless required by law.
We may report information about your Account to credit bureaus. Late payments, missed payments,
or other defaults on your Account may be reflected in your credit report. If you believe that we have
furnished any inaccurate information relating to your Account to any consumer-reporting agency,
you may notify us by phone or mail at 1-800-367-7576; Card Service Center, PO Box 569120,
Dallas, TX 75356. To help us respond to your notification, include your account number, Social
Security Number, the name of the consumer-reporting agency reflecting the inaccurate information,
and an explanation of why you believe the information is inaccurate. You understand that you may
also contact the appropriate consumer-reporting agency directly at the appropriate address and toll-
free number: Equifax, P.O. Box 740241, Atlanta, GA 30374, 800.685.1111; Trans Union, P.O. Box
1000, Chester, PA 19022, 800-916-8800; or Experian, P.O. Box 2002, Allen, TX 75013,
888.397.3742.
Change in Marital Status. A change in marital status between any of you will not affect the
individual liability of any of you under this Agreement. Your liability for debt incurred after a
change in status does not end until all Cards and Credit Devices are returned to us, even if you give
us notice of the change in status and notice that further use by any person is unauthorized.
Notices. Notices given under this Agreement or relating to the Account will be effective only if
given in writing to us at TIB The Independent Bankers Bank, N.A., P.O Box 569120, Dallas, Texas
75356-9120, and to you at your last address shown on our records. You agree to notify us
immediately if your address changes from that shown on the application you submitted in
connection with opening the Account.
Liability for Unauthorized Use. If any Card is lost or stolen or otherwise may be used without
your permission (express or implied), you must immediately notify us orally or in writing at the
following phone number or address: 1-800-367-7576 or at TIB The Independent Bankers Bank,
N.A., P.O Box 569120, Dallas, Texas 75356-9120. If unauthorized use of a Card occurs before you
notify us of the loss, theft or unauthorized use, you may be liable up to a maximum amount of $50.
If unauthorized use of a Credit Device occurs, you may be liable for all of the unauthorized use.
State Law Disclosures. CA Residents: Interest is compounded on unpaid Interest Charges on
Purchases, Cash Advances and Balance Transfers. MD Residents: You have the right under Section
12-510 of the Commercial Law Code to receive an answer to a written inquiry concerning the status
of your Account. NJ Residents: Because certain provisions of this Agreement are subject to
applicable laws, they may be void, unenforceable or inapplicable in some jurisdictions. None of
these provisions, however, is void, unenforceable or inapplicable in New Jersey.
YOUR BILLING RIGHTS - KEEP THIS NOTICE FOR FUTURE USE
This notice tells you about your rights and our responsibilities under the Fair Credit Billing
Act.
What to do if you find a mistake on your statement.
If you think there is an error on your statement, write to us at BBCS, Attn: Dispute Department,
1550 North Brown Road, Suite 150, Lawrenceville, GA 30043 as soon as possible.
In your letter, give us the following information:
* Account information: Your name and Account number.
* Dollar amount: The dollar amount of the suspected error.
* Description of problem: If you think there is an error on your bill, describe what
you believe is wrong and why you believe it is a mistake.
You must contact us within 60 days after the error appeared on your statement and at least 3
business days before an automated payment is scheduled, if you want to stop payment on the amount
you think is wrong.
You must notify us of any potential errors in writing. You may call us, but if you do we are not
required to investigate any potential errors and you may have to pay the amount in question.
What will happen after we receive your letter.
When we receive you letter, we must do two things:
1. Within 30 days of receiving your letter, we must tell you that we received your letter. We
will also tell you if we have already corrected the error.
2. Within 90 days of receiving your letter, we must either correct the error or explain to you
why we believe the bill is correct.
While we investigate whether or not there has been an error, we cannot try to collect the amount in
question, or report you as delinquent on the amount. The charge in question may remain on your
statement, and we may continue to charge you interest on that amount. While you do not have to
pay the amount in question, you are responsible for the remainder of your balance. We can apply
any unpaid amount against your credit limit.
After we finish our investigation, one of two things will happen:
1. If we made a mistake: You will not have to pay the amount in question or any interest or
other fees related to that amount.
2. If we do not believe there was a mistake: You will have to pay the amount in question,
along with applicable interest and fees. We will send you a statement of the amount you
owe and the date payment is due. We may then report you as delinquent if you do not pay
the amount we think you owe.
If you receive our explanation but still believe your bill is wrong, you must write to us within 10
days telling us that you still refuse to pay. If you do so, we cannot report you as delinquent without
also reporting that you are questioning your bill. We must tell you the name of anyone to whom we
reported you as delinquent, and we must let those organizations know when the matter has been
settled between us.
If we do not follow all of the rules above, you do not have to pay the first $50 of the amount you
question even if your bill is correct.
Your rights if you are dissatisfied with your credit card purchases.
If you are dissatisfied with the goods or services that you have purchased with your Credit Card, and
you have tried in good faith to correct the problem with the merchant, you may have the right not to
pay the remaining amount due on the purchase. To use this right, all of the following must be true:
1. The purchase must have been made in your home state or within 100 miles of your
current mailing address, and the purchase price must have been more than $50.
(Note: Neither of these are necessary if your purchase was based on an
advertisement we mailed to you, or if we own the company that sold you the goods
or services.)
2. You must have used your credit card for the purchase. Purchases made with cash
advances from an ATM or with a check that accesses your credit card account do
not qualify.
3. You must not yet have fully paid for the purchase.
If all of the criteria above are met and you are still dissatisfied with the purchase, contact us
in writing at BBCS, Attn: Dispute Department, 1550 North Brown Road, Suite 150,
Lawrenceville, GA 30043.
While we investigate, the same rules apply to the disputed amount as discussed above. After
we finish our investigation, we will tell you our decision. At that point, if we think you owe
an amount and you do not pay, we may report you as delinquent.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The Credit Card Agreement & this Disclosure Statement constitute the Agreement for the Account.
Low Rate Card
Interest Rates and Interest Charges
Annual Percentage Rate (APR)
for Purchases
2.9% introductory APR for six months.
After that, your APR will be 11.74%. This APR will vary with the market based on the
Prime Rate. a
APR for Balance Transfers and
Cash Advances
2.9% introductory APR for six months.
After that, your APR will be 11.74%. This APR will vary with the market based on the Prime
Rate. a
Penalty APR and When it
Applies
20.74% - This APR will vary with the market based on the Prime Rate. b
This APR may be applied if you allow your Account to become 60 days past due.
How Long Will the Penalty Apply? If your APR is increased for the reason stated above, the
Penalty APR will apply until you make three consecutive minimum payments when due.
Paying Interest
Your due date is at least 25 days after the close of each billing cycle. We will not charge you
any interest on purchases if you pay your entire balance by the due date each month. We will
begin charging interest on cash advances and balance transfers on the transaction date.
For Credit Card Tips from the
Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau
To learn more about factors to consider when applying for or using a credit card, visit the
website of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau at
http://www.consumerfinance.gov/learnmore/.
Fees
Annual Fee None
Transaction Fees:
Balance Transfer and Cash
Advance
International Transaction
Either $10 or 3% of the amount of each balance transfer or cash advance, whichever is
greater.
2% of each transaction in U.S. dollars.
Penalty Fees:
Late Payment
Returned Payment
Up to $25
Up to $25
How We Will Calculate Your Balance: We use a method called “average daily balance (including new purchases).” See your
account agreement for more details.
Billing Rights: Information on your rights to dispute transactions and how to exercise those rights is provided in the account
agreement that will be provided to you before you begin using your new card.
Prime Rate: After the introductory rate, the APR will vary based on changes in the Index, the Prime Rate (the base rate on corporate
loans posted by at least 70% of the 10 largest U.S. banks) published in the Wall Street Journal. The Index will be adjusted on the 25th
day of each month or the business day preceding the 25th day if that day falls on a weekend or a holiday recognized by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Changes in the Index will take effect beginning with the first billing cycle in the month
following a change in the Index. Increases or decreases in the Index will cause the APR and periodic rate to fluctuate, resulting in
increased or decreased Interest Charges on the Account. As of March 23, 2018, the Index was 4.75%.
a We add 6.99% to the Prime Rate to determine the APR for Purchases, Balance Transfers, and Cash Advances. The Account will
never have an APR over 21%.
b We add 15.99% to the Prime Rate to determine the Penalty APR. The Account will never have an APR over 21%.
The issuer and administrator of the credit card program is TIB The Independent BankersBank, N.A. The information about the cost of the Card described in this
table is accurate as of April 1, 2018. This information may change after that date. To find out what may have changed, call us at 800-367-7576 or write TIB The
Independent BankersBank, N.A., P.O. Box 569120, Dallas, Texas 75356-9120.
How Interest Charges are Determined & When They are Imposed
Interest Charges on the Account will be figured on each monthly billing statement by applying the periodic rate to the total Balance
Subject to Interest Charges. The periodic rate used to compute Interest Charges is disclosed above and is a monthly rate which, when
multiplied by 12, equals the APR disclosed above. If you obtain Cash Advances, Balance Transfers or elect to pay for Purchases in
installments, each periodic statement will include an Interest Charge. There is no minimum Interest Charge. In connection with
Cash Advances and Balance Transfers, the first monthly billing statement after you receive a Cash Advance or Balance Transfer will
include an Interest Charge from the date the transaction is posted to your Account. There is no period within which you may repay
cash advances or balance transfers in order to avoid an Interest Charge.
Interest Charges will not be imposed on purchases posted to your account in certain circumstances. For example, assuming that
billing cycles begin on the first day and end on the last day of each calendar month, and the month of June is the “current” billing
cycle: if (1) the purchase balance at the end of the preceding May billing cycle is paid in full by the payment due date (in June) for
the May billing cycle and (2) the purchase balance at the end of the June billing cycle is paid in full by its payment due date (in July),
no Interest Charges will be imposed on purchases posted to the account during June. However, if the purchase balance of the May
billing cycle is not paid in full by its payment due date in June, Interest Charges will be imposed on purchases posted to the account
in June from the date of such posting. If the June purchase balance is not paid in full by its payment due date in July, Interest
Charges will be imposed from the first day of the July billing cycle on, but only on, the portion of June purchases not paid by the
payment due date in July.
Any portion of the New Balance appearing on a monthly billing statement (including Cash Advances, Balance Transfers, Purchases,
Interest Charge and Other Charges) which is not paid in full and credited to the Account by the “Payment Due Date” shown on that
statement becomes part of the “Previous Balance” on your next monthly billing statement.
All payments received by 5:00 p.m. during our normal business day at the address indicated on the monthly billing statement will be
credited to the Account as of the date of receipt of payment. If payment is made at any location other than such address, credit for
the payment may be delayed up to 5 days.
Method of Computing Balance Subject to Interest Charge
The Balance Subject to an Interest Charge is the sum of the “Average Daily Balance” for Purchases and the “Average Daily Balance”
for Cash Advances and Balance Transfers, computed as follows:
The Average Daily Balance for Purchases is computed by adding each day’s ending balance for the current billing cycle (less any
Interest Charge included therein and excluding any Cash Advances and Balance Transfers made during the current billing cycle), and
dividing the total of such balances by the number of days in the billing cycle. Such total will include Purchases and debit
adjustments made during the current billing cycle only if you have not paid in full the New Balance figure from the previous
statement as indicated by a “Payment” figure equal to or greater than the “Previous Balance” figure under the Summary of
Transactions on the statement for the current billing cycle.
The Average Daily Balance for Cash Advances and Balance Transfers is computed by adding each day’s outstanding balance of
Cash Advances and Balance Transfers charged to the Account during the current billing cycle, and dividing the total of such balances
by the number of days in the billing cycle.
If the Cash Advance and Balance Transfer portion of the New Balance and the Interest Charge applicable thereto are not paid in
full and credited to the Account by the “Payment Due Date” shown on the first monthly billing statement to which the Cash
Advance and Balance Transfer is billed, any balance remaining becomes a part of the “Previous Balance” on Cardholder’s next
periodic statement and is computed as part of the Average Daily Balance for Purchases.
Armed Forces Members and Dependents
Federal law provides important protections to members of the Armed Forces and their dependents relating to extensions of
consumer credit. In general, the cost of consumer credit to a member of the Armed Forces and his or her dependent may not exceed
an annual percentage rate of 36 percent. This rate must include, as applicable to the credit transaction or account: The costs
associated with credit insurance premiums; fees for ancillary products sold in connection with the credit transaction; any
application fee charged (other than certain application fees for specified credit transactions or accounts); and any participation fee
charged (other than certain participation fees for a credit card account). To hear this same disclosure and for a general description
of your payment obligations for this credit card account, please call us at 1-866-415-4842.
Sys 4193 4974 8601 -Agent 2000 (Rev. 04/18)
Promissory Note
FOR VALUE RECEIVED, ________________________________[Borrower’s Name] of
__________________________ [Borrower’s Address], (“Borrower”), promises to pay to
__________________________ [Lender’s Name] of ___________________ [Lender’s Address]
(“Lender”), ___________________________ [Amount in Words] (____ [Amount in Numbers])
(“Borrowed Money”) in principal, plus interest at a rate of _____ % (“Interest”) annually on the
unpaid balance as set forth herein.
1. PAYMENT TERMS (Pick Only One):
☐ Borrower shall make _____ equal payments of ____________________________
(______________) each, every __________ (month/year) starting on __________________ and
ending on __________________.
☐ Borrower shall pay a lump sum payment by ______________________________.
2. TERM: The term of this Loan begins from _______________________ and ends at
___________________.
3. SECURITY (Pick Only One):
☐ This Note is Unsecured.
☐ This Note is Secured by a trust deed on Borrowser’s Property described as
___________________________________________________________ hereinafter known as
the “Security”, which shall transfer to the possession and ownership of the Lender
IMMEDIATELY pursuant to Section 6A of this Note. The Security may not be sold or
transferred without the Lender’s consent until the Due Date. If Borrower breaches this provision,
Lender may declare all sums due under this Note immediately due and payable, unless prohibited
by applicable law. The Lender shall have the sole-option to accept the Security as full- payment
for the Borrowed Money without further liabilities or obligations. If the market value of the
Security does not exceed the Borrowed Money, the Borrower shall remain liable for the balance
due while accruing interest at the maximum rate allowed by law.
4. PREPAYMENT: Borrower may prepay the loan, with Interest, without any penalty.
5. ALLOCATION OF PAYMENTS: Payments shall be first credited any late fees due, then to
interest due and any remainder will be credited to principal.
6. ACCELERATION: Lender may require Borrower to pay the entire balance of the unpaid
principal and accrued interest immediately if the Borrower is more than _____ days late in
making a payment.
7. ATTORNEYS’ FEES AND COSTS: If the Lender prevails in any action to collect on this
note, Borrower shall pay Lender’s reasonable costs and attorneys’ fees.
8. STATE LAW: This note shall be governed in accordance with the laws of the State of
__________________________________________.
9. MODIFICATIONS: Any modifications of or amendments to the terms herein shall be made
in writing by all of the parties hereto.
10. NOTICE: Any notices required or permitted to be given hereunder shall be given in writing
and shall be delivered (a) in person, (b) by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, (c) by facsimile, or (d) by a commercial overnight courier that guarantees next day
delivery and provides a receipt, and such notices shall be made to the parties at the addresses
listed below.
SIGNATURES
Borrower’s Signature Borrower’s Full Name
Lender’s Signature Lender’s Full Name

DEED OF GUARANTEE
THIS DEED OF GUARANTEE executed at _________ this ____ day of
_____________, 20......., by 1) Shri ___________ Son of Shri ______________, aged
___ years residing at _____________________________________________, in the
State of ______________ 2) Shri ___________ Son of Shri ______________, aged
___ years residing at _____________________________________________, in the
State of ______________ and 3) Shri ___________ Son of Shri ______________,
aged ___ years residing at _____________________________________________, in
the State of ______________ (hereinafter referred to as "the Guarantors", which
expression shall, unless excluded by or repugnant to the subject or context thereof,
include their respective heirs, executors and administrators) of the one part; and Indian
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited, a Company incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and having its Registered Office at Core-4A, East
Court, Ist Floor, India Habitat Centre, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003, hereinafter
referred to as "IREDA", (which expression shall, unless excluded by or repugnant to the
subject or context thereof, include its successors and assigns) of the OTHER PART.
-2-
WHEREAS
At the request of M/s. ____________________ Ltd., a Company within the meaning of
the Companies Act., 1956 (1 of 1956) and having its Registered Office at
______________________________________________ (hereinafter called the
Borrower) and at the request of the Guarantors, IREDA had agreed to lend and advance
to the Borrower Term Loan not exceeding Rs. _______ Lakhs (Rupees
___________________________ only) (hereinafter referred to as the "Loan") for its
project envisaging setting up _______________________________________ (Project
No. ____), on the terms and conditions contained in the Agreement dated
______________, 20..... entered into between the Borrower and IREDA, (hereinafter
referred to as the "Loan Agreement"), the terms, conditions and provisions whereof have
been noted by the Guarantors, which, inter-alia, stipulated that an unconditional and
irrevocable guarantee should be given by the Guarantors for due repayment of the loan
and payment of all other monies payable by the Borrower in the form and manner
prescribed by IREDA before any part of loan is disbursed to the Borrower.
(2) Accordingly at the request of the Borrower the Guarantor(s) have agreed to give
the requisite guarantee in the form and manner hereinafter expressed.
(3) At the request of Guarantors, IREDA has agreed to make to the Borrower,
disbursements/interim disbursements from out of the loan.
NOW THIS DEED WITNESSETH AS FOLLOWS :
That in pursuance of the above said agreement and in consideration of the premises, the
Guarantors hereby JOINTLY AND SEVERALLY unconditionally and irrevocably
guarantee and agree with IREDA as follows:
(1) IREDA shall have the sole discretion to make disbursement(s) and/or interim
disbursements to the Borrower and of the loan.
(2) The Borrower shall duly and punctually repay the loan of Rs. _______ lakhs
(Rupees ___________________________ only) and pay all interest, additional interest,
premium on premature repayment and other monies in accordance with the Agreement
and perform and comply with all the other terms, conditions and covenants contained in
the Loan Agreement ;
(3) In the event of any default on the part of the Borrower in repayment of the
principal sum of the loan i.e. Rs. _______ Lakhs (Rupees
___________________________ only) and/or payment of interest and/or other monies
in accordance with and in the manner provided in the Loan Agreement or in the event of
any default on the part of the Borrower to comply with or perform any of the terms,
conditions and covenants contained in the Loan Agreement which constitute an event of
default in terms thereof, the Guarantors shall upon demand by IREDA forthwith pay to
IREDA without demur all the amounts which shall become due and payable by the
Borrower. The demand or notice given in the manner provided in clause 21 hereof shall
be sufficient demand or notice to the Guarantors.
-3-
(4) The Guarantors shall also indemnify and keep IREDA indemnified against all
losses for principal sum of the loan interest and other monies, and all costs, charges and
expenses whatsoever which IREDA may suffer, pay or incur by reason of or in
connection with any such default on the part of the Borrower, including legal proceedings
taken against the Borrower and/or the Guarantors for recovery of the monies referred to
in clauses 2 above.
(5) The Guarantors hereby give their consent and agree that,IREDA shall be at
liberty to vary, alter or modify or revise the terms and conditions of the Agreement,
and/or the security documents executed by the Borrower in favour of IREDA and also
the nature of security created/to be created in favour of IREDA and in particular to defer,
postpone or revise the repayment of the Loans and/or payment of interest and other
monies payable by the Borrower to IREDA on such terms and conditions as may be
considered necessary by IREDA including any increase in the rate of interest. IREDA
shall also be at liberty to absolutely dispense with or release all or any of the
security/securities furnished or required to be furnished by the Borrower to IREDA to
secure the Loans. The Guarantors agree that the liability under the guarantee shall in no
manner be affected by any such variations, alterations, modifications, revision, waiver,
surrender or release of security or dispensing with any security altogether and that no
further consent of Guarantors is required for giving effect to any such variation,
alteration, modification, waiver,surrender or release of security, or dispensing with, the
security altogether.
(6) IREDA shall have full liberty, without notice to the Guarantors and without in any
way affecting this guarantee,to exercise at any time and from time to time and in any
manner any power or powers reserved to IREDA under the Loan Agreement or under
the law and to enforce or forbear to enforce payment of the Loan or any part thereof or
interest or other monies due to IREDA from the Borrower or any of the remedies or
securities available to IREDA to enter into any composition or compound with or to
postpone or grant time or any other indulgence or facility to the Borrower AND the
Guarantors shall not be released by the exercise by IREDA of its liberty in regard to the
matters referred to above or by any act or omission on the part of IREDA or by any other
matter or thing whatsoever which under the Law relating to sureties would but for this
provision have the effect of so releasing the Guarantors AND the Guarantors hereby
waive in favour of IREDA so far as may be necessary to give effect to any of the
provisions of this Guarantee, all the suretyship and other rights which the Guarantors
might otherwise be entitled to enforce.
(7) This Guarantee shall be enforceable against the Guarantors notwithstanding
that any security or securities executed by the Borrower in favour of IREDA shall at the
time when the proceedings are taken against the Guarantors on this Guarantee, be
outstanding or unrealised or lost.
(8) The guarantee herein contained shall be enforceable against the Guarantor/s
notwithstanding that no action of any kind has been taken by IREDA against the
Company and an intimation in writing sent to the Company by IREDA that a default or
breach has occurred shall be treated as final and conclusive proof as to the facts as
stated therein.
-4-
(9) The Guarantors hereby agree and give consent to the sale, mortgage or prior, pari-
passu or second charge basis, release etc., of any of the assets by the Borrower from
time to time as may be approved by IREDA or the transfer of any of the assets of the
Borrower from one unit to the other as may be approved by IREDA or to the release or
leasing out by IREDA any or whole of the assets charged to IREDA on such terms and
conditions as IREDA may deem fit and this may be treated as a standing and continuing
consent for each and every individual act of transfer, mortgage, release or lease of any
such assets of the Borrower. The Guarantors hereby declare and agree that no separate
consent for each such transfer, mortgage, release or lease or any of such assets would
be necessary in future.
(11) The Guarantors hereby agree and declare that the Borrower will be free to avail
of further loans or other facilities from IREDA or any other financial institution or bank in
addition to the Loans and/or to secure the same during the subsistence of this guarantee
and in that event the guarantee herein contained will not be affected or vitiated in any
way whatsoever but will remain in full force and effect and binding on the Guarantors.
(12) The rights of IREDA against the Guarantors shall remain in full force and effect
notwithstanding any arrangement which may be reached between the IREDA and other
Guarantors, if any, or notwithstanding the release of the other or others from liability and
notwithstanding that at any time hereafter the other Guarantor(s) may cease for any
reason whatsoever to be liable to IREDA, IREDA shall be at liberty to require the
performance by the Guarantors of their obligations hereunder to the same extent in all
respect as if the Guarantors had at all times been solely liable to perform the said
obligations.
(13) To give effect to this guarantee, IREDA may act as if the Guarantors were
the principal debtors to IREDA.
(14) The Guarantors hereby declare and agree that they have not received and shall not,
without the prior consent in writing of IREDA receive any security or commission from
the Borrower for giving this guarantee so long any monies remain due and payable by
the Borrower to IREDA under the Agreement.
(15) The Guarantors shall not in the event of the liquidation of the Borrower prove in
competition with IREDA in the liquidation proceedings.
(16) A certificate in writing signed by a duly authorised official of IREDA shall be
conclusive evidence against the Guarantors of the amount for the time being due to
IREDA from the Borrower in any action or proceeding brought on this Guarantee against
the Guarantors.
(17) This Guarantee shall not be wholly or partially satisfied or exhausted by any
payments made to or settled with IREDA by the Borrower and shall be valid and binding
on the Guarantors and operative until repayment in full of all monies due to IREDA under
the Loan Agreement.
-5-
(18) This Guarantee shall be irrevocable and the obligations of the Guarantors
hereunder shall not be conditional on the receipt of any prior notice by the Guarantors or
by the Borrower and the demand or notice by IREDA, as provided in Clause 21 hereof
shall be sufficient notice to or demand on the Guarantors.
(19) The liability of the Guarantors under this Guarantee shall not be affected by:-
i) any change in the constitution or winding up or Dissolution of the Borrower or any
absorption, merger or amalgamation of the Borrower with any other company,
corporation or concern; or
ii) any change in the management of the Borrower or takeover of the management
of the Borrower by Central or State Government or by any other authority; or
iii) acquisition or nationalisation of the Borrower and/or of any its undertaking(s)
pursuant to any law; or
iv) any change in the constitution of IREDA or
v) the insolvency or death of the Guarantor(s).
vi) in the event of Guarantors ceasing to be Director of the Borrower for any reason
whatsoever.
(19) This Guarantee shall be a continuing one and for allamounts advanced or to be
advanced by IREDA to the Borrower and all interest and costs and other monies and
shall remain in full force and effect till such time the Borrower repays in full the Loan
together with all interest, additional interest, costs, charges and all other monies that
may from time to time become due and payable and remain unpaid to IREDA under the
Loan Agreement.
(20) The liability of the Guarantors hereunder shall not exceed the sum of Rs.
_______ lakhs (Rupees ___________________________ only) plus all interest,
additional interest, costs, charges, and other monies payable by the Borrower to IREDA
under the Agreement.
(21) Any demand for payment or notice under this Guarantee shall be sufficiently
given if sent by post to or left at the last known address of the Guarantors or their
personal representatives, as the case may be, such demand or notice is to be made or
given , and shall be deemed to have reached the addressee in the course of post, if
given by post, and no period of limitation shall commence to run in favour of the
Guarantors until after demand for payment in writing shall have been made or given as
aforesaid, and in proving such notice when sent by post it shall be sufficiently proved if
the envelope containing the notice was posted and a certificate by any of the responsible
officers of IREDA that to the best of his knowledge and belief, the envelope containing
the said notice was so posted shall be conclusive as against the Guarantors, even
though it was returned unserved on account of refusal of the Guarantors or otherwise.
(22) The Guarantors hereby agree and and confirm that Civil Courts/Tribunals in
Delhi/New Delhi alone shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other legal
proceedings arising out of this Deed of Guarantee.
-6-
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the within named Guarantors 1) Shri ___________ 2) Shri
___________ and 3) Shri ___________ have set their respective hands on the day,
month and the year first hereinabove written.
SIGNED AND DELIVERED BY
the within named Guarantors
Shri ___________
Shri ___________
Shri ___________
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
1
JANE E. LAWTON CONSERVATION LOAN PROGRAM
SECURITY AGREEMENT
THIS SECURITY AGREEMENT (as it may be amended, this “Agreement”) is made as
of this ____ day of ________________________, 202*, by [Borrower] (the “Borrower”), in favor
of the MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, an independent agency of the State of
Maryland (together with its assigns or successors, the “Administration”).
RECITALS
1. Simultaneously with the execution of this Agreement, the Administration will make
a loan to the Borrower in the principal amount not to exceed [Loan Amount] plus applicable
interest thereon (“Loan”).
2. The Loan will be made pursuant to a Loan Agreement dated the date hereof,
between the Administration and the Borrower, as it may be amended (“Loan Agreement”).
3. The Loan is evidenced by the Note issued in favor of the Administration.
4. As a condition to the making of the Loan, the Administration has required that the
Borrower execute this Agreement to secure its Obligations under the Note and the Financing
Documents.
5. All capitalized terms used and not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning
assigned and set forth under the Loan Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and the agreements and covenants
contained herein, and for other good and valuable consideration the receipt and sufficiency of
which are hereby acknowledged, the Borrower and the Administration, intending to be legally
bound, agree as follows:
1. Recitals. The recitals set forth above form an integral and substantive part of the
Agreement and are incorporated herein.
2. Definitions: For the purposes of this Agreement the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
“Borrower’s Obligations” means all existing and future indebtedness and
obligations of the Borrower to the Administration, including the Loan and the Obligations (as
defined in the Loan Agreement)
"Collateral" has the meaning used and set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and
made a part hereof.
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
2
"Equipment" has the meaning used and set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and
made a part hereof.
"Project" has the meaning used and set forth in the Loan Agreement.
1.2 Grant of Security Interest. To secure the full and prompt payment and performance
of all of the Obligations, the Borrower hereby pledges and assigns to the Administration, and grants
to the Administration, a continuing security interest in all of the Collateral, wherever located,
whether in the Borrower’s possession or in the possession and control of a third party for the
Borrower’s or the Administration’s account. All of the Borrower’s Books and Records, in addition
to all of the Borrower’s ledger sheets, files, records, books of account, business papers and
documents relating to the Collateral shall, until delivered to or removed by the Administration, be
kept by the Borrower in trust for the Administration.
2. Financing Statement Filing. The Borrower authorizes the Administration to file
financing statements, and any amendments to existing financing statements, covering the
Collateral and all personal property of the Borrower and containing any legends which the
Administration deems necessary or desirable to protect the Administration’s interest in the
Collateral. The Borrower agrees to pay all taxes, fees, and costs (including attorneys’ fees) paid
or incurred by the Administration in connection with the preparation, filing or recordation of
financing statements.
3. Representations and Warranties. The Borrower (to the fullest extent applicable to
its Eligible Borrower status) represents and warrants:
3.1. No Other Financing Statements. No financing statement covering any of
the Collateral is or shall be on file in any public office or land or financing records except for
financing statements in favor of the Administration.
3.2. Ownership of Collateral. The Borrower is the legal and beneficial owner of
all of the Collateral, free and clear of all liens, security interests, and other encumbrances. The
Borrower is and shall remain the sole owner of the Collateral and is able to sell, transfer, pledge
and grant to the Administration a continuing security interest in the Collateral. Each material
document and agreement relating to the Collateral shall be true and correct in all material respects.
All signatures and endorsements of the Borrower that appear on such documents and agreements
shall be genuine, and the Borrower shall have the full capacity to execute those documents and
agreements.
3.3. No Violation of Other Agreements or Contracts. This Agreement and each
of the other Financing Documents (as defined in the Loan Agreement) will not violate any
provisions, or result in a breach, of any existing mortgage, deed of trust, indenture, lease, contract,
or agreement of [Borrower] or affecting its property including the Collateral.
3.4. Borrower’s Name and Addresses. The Borrower’s correct legal name and
each legal or trade name of the Borrower for the previous 12 years is specified on Exhibit A
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
3
attached hereto. The addresses of the Borrower’s executive office and each other place of business
of the Borrower is set forth on Exhibit A (collectively with any other place of business of the
Borrower, the “Borrower’s Facilities”).
3.5. Location of Collateral, etc. The Collateral and the books and records
concerning the Collateral as well as the Books and Records regarding the Project are located at the
Borrower’s Facilities indicated on Exhibit A attached hereto.
3.6. Patents, Trademarks. The Borrower owns or has the right to use all
necessary patents, patent rights, licenses, trademarks, trade names, trade name rights, copyrights
and franchises to conduct its business as now conducted, without any known conflict with any
patent, patent right, license, trademark, trademark rights, trade name right, trade name, copyright
or franchise right of any other person. The Borrower has not received any notices of infringement
or misappropriation from any Person with respect to the patents, trademarks, copyrights, trade
names, trade secrets or licenses which it owns or has a right to use.
3.7. Fixtures. Any Collateral that is a fixture is or will be attached to the real
property described in Exhibit C attached hereto, and the record owner of that real property is
[Name of Property Owner].
4. Covenants. The Borrower covenants that:
4.1. Payment and Performance. The Borrower will pay the Borrower's
Obligations when due and payable and will perform and observe the terms of the Financing
Documents to be performed and observed by the Borrower.
4.2. State of Organization. The Borrower shall not change the Borrower’s state
of organization or the Borrower’s name.
4.3. Amendments to Financing Statements. The Borrower shall not file any
amendments, correction statements, or termination statements concerning the Collateral without
the prior written consent of the Administration.
4.4. Maintenance of Collateral. The Borrower will maintain the Collateral as
required under the Financing Documents and in good order and condition, ordinary wear and tear
excepted, and will use and maintain the Collateral in compliance with all laws and in compliance
with all applicable insurance requirements and regulations. The Borrower will promptly notify
the Administration in writing of any litigation affecting the Collateral which the Borrower knows
or has reason to believe is pending or threatened. The Borrower will promptly pay when due all
taxes, charges, and fees relating to the Collateral and shall defend the Collateral, at the Borrower’s
expense, against all claims and demands of any persons claiming any interest in the Collateral
adverse to the Borrower or the Administration.
4.5. Transfer and Other Liens. The Borrower will not sell, lease, transfer,
exchange, or otherwise dispose of any part of the Collateral without the prior written consent of
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
4
the Administration and will not permit any lien, security interest, or other encumbrance to attach
to any part of the Collateral other than those in favor of the Administration or those permitted by
the Administration in writing.
4.6. Location of Collateral and Books and Records. Except for mobile
equipment and motor vehicles, the Collateral and all books and records pertaining to the Collateral
will be located at one of the Borrower’s Facilities in Maryland. The Borrower will immediately
advise the Administration in writing of the opening of any new place of business and of any
anticipated change in the location of the places where any part of the Collateral or any of the books
and records concerning the Collateral or the Books and Records regarding the Project are kept.
4.7. Inspections of Borrower’s Facilities and Collateral. At all reasonable times
the Administration and its agents and designees shall have full access and the right to enter any of
the Borrower’s Facilities to inspect the Collateral and to audit, check, inspect and make abstracts
and copies from Borrower’s Books and Records or any of its books, records, audits,
correspondence and all other papers relating to its assets and the operation of Borrower’s business
relating to the Project and the Borrower shall pay the reasonable costs of such inspections.
4.8. Financial Statements, Books, and Records. The Borrower will (a) at all
times maintain, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or other consistently
applied accounting methods, accurate and complete books and records pertaining to (1) the
operation, business, and financial condition of the Borrower, (2) the Collateral, and (3) any
contracts and collections relating to the Collateral; (b) furnish to the Administration promptly upon
request, and in form and content and at the intervals specified by the Administration, any
information concerning the operation, business, affairs, and financial condition of the Borrower as
the Administration may request; (c) at all reasonable times and without delay, permit the
Administration and its agents to enter any of the Borrower’s Facilities where any books, records,
and other data concerning the Borrower or the Collateral or the Books and Records regarding the
Project may be kept and to examine, audit, inspect, and photocopy any of those books, records,
and other data; (d) furnish to the Administration promptly upon request and in the form and content
specified by the Administration lists of purchasers of inventory, aging of accounts, aggregate cost
or wholesale market value of inventory, schedules of equipment, and other data concerning the
Collateral as the Administration may specify, and (e) mark its books and records in a manner
satisfactory to the Administration so that the Administration's rights in the Collateral will be
shown.
4.9. Insurance. The Borrower shall obtain and continuously maintain insurance
for so long as the Loan remains outstanding in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Exhibit C to the Loan Agreement. The specified insurance shall protect the Collateral against any
risks, in amounts, deductibles, and with companies acceptable to the Administration, and each
policy shall contain an endorsement satisfactory to the Administration (a) naming the
Administration as loss payee and additional insured, and (b) prohibiting the policy from being
cancelled or altered or the Administration from being removed as loss payee without at least 30
days prior written notice to the Administration. In all events, the amounts of insurance coverage
shall conform to prudent business practices and shall be in amounts so that the Borrower will not
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
5
be deemed a co-insurer under applicable insurance laws, policies, or practices. The Borrower
hereby assigns to the Administration and grants to the Administration a continuing security interest
in any proceeds of such policies and authorizes the Administration to adjust or compromise any
loss under those policies and to collect and receive all proceeds. The Borrower authorizes and
directs each insurance company to pay all proceeds directly and solely to the Administration. The
Borrower hereby designates the Administration and its designees as attorney-in-fact of the
Borrower (which appointment is coupled with an interest), irrevocably and with power of
substitution, with authority to execute and endorse in the Borrower’s name all proofs of loss, drafts,
checks, and any other documents necessary to accomplish such collection. Any person making
payments to the Administration under the terms of this section is hereby relieved from any
obligation to see to the application of any sums paid.
After deducting all costs and expenses (including attorneys’ fees) incurred by the
Administration in the collection and handling of the proceeds from any insurance proceeds, the
net proceeds shall be applied as follows: (a) If no Event of Default as defined under § 8 below
currently exists, net proceeds may be applied, at the Borrower’s option, either toward replacing or
restoring the Equipment, in a manner and on terms satisfactory to the Administration, or as a credit
against any of the Borrower’s Obligations, whether matured or unmatured, as determined by the
Administration. In the event that the Borrower elects to replace or restore the Equipment, then net
proceeds shall be deposited in a segregated account of the Borrower subject to the sole order of
the Administration and shall be disbursed by the Administration in the manner and at the times as
the Administration deems appropriate to complete the replacement or restoration. If an Event of
Default occurs at any time before the completion of replacement or restoration, then the
Administration shall have the option to apply all remaining net proceeds either toward replacing
or restoring the Equipment, in a manner and on terms satisfactory to the Administration, or as a
credit against any of the Borrower’s Obligations, whether matured or unmatured, as determined
by the Administration. (b) If an Event of Default occurs prior to the deposit of the net proceeds,
then the Administration may apply the net proceeds either toward replacing or restoring the
Equipment, in a manner and on terms satisfactory to the Administration, or as a credit against any
of the Borrower’s Obligations, whether matured or unmatured, as determined by the
Administration.
The Borrower will cause each insurance company to deliver annually to the Administration
evidence, satisfactory to the Administration, that all required insurance is in effect.
4.10. Assignments. Whenever required by the Administration, the Borrower
shall promptly deliver to the Administration, with all endorsements and assignments required by
the Administration, all instruments, chattel paper, guaranties and the like received by the Borrower
relating to any of the Collateral or proceeds of any of the Collateral. Any assignments are to secure
payment of the Borrower's Obligations and performance under the Financing Documents and do
not constitute a sale of any property to the Administration, whether or not any assignment is in
absolute form.
4.11. Further Assurances. The Borrower will defend its title to the Collateral
against all persons and will, upon request of the Administration, (a) furnish any further assurances
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
6
of title required by the Administration, and (b) obtain, deliver and execute, or cause to be obtained,
delivered and executed, in form and content satisfactory to the Administration, any document
requested by the Administration in order to perfect, preserve, maintain, or continue the perfection
of the Administration's security interest in the Collateral or its priority, including, for example, the
filing of financing statements and other notices and amendments, renewals, continuations, or
terminations of any financing statements or security agreements, and the Borrower shall take any
and all steps and observe such formalities as the Administration may reasonably request, in order
to create, perfect, protect and maintain a valid lien upon any and all of the Collateral. The Borrower
will pay the costs of preparation and filing of any document under this subsection, including any
required recordation or transfer taxes. All charges, expenses and fees the Administration may
incur in doing any of the foregoing, and any local taxes or fees relating thereto, shall be charged
to the Borrower’s account and added to the Obligations, or, at the Administration’s option, shall
be paid to the Administration immediately upon demand.
5. Care of Collateral. The Borrower shall bear all risk of loss of the Collateral. The
Administration shall have no liability or duty, either before or after the occurrence of an Event of
Default, for loss or damage to any part of the Collateral, to collect or enforce any of its rights
against the Collateral, to collect any income accruing on the Collateral, or to preserve rights against
account borrowers or other parties with prior interests in the Collateral. If the Administration
receives any notices requiring action concerning any Collateral in the Administration’s possession,
the Administration shall take reasonable steps to forward those notices to the Borrower. The
Borrower is responsible for responding to notices concerning the Collateral, voting the Collateral,
and exercising rights and options, calls and conversions of the Collateral. The Administration’s
sole responsibility is to take any action reasonably requested by the Borrower in writing; but the
Administration is not required to take any action that, in the Administration’s sole judgment, would
adversely affect the value of the Collateral as security for the Borrower’s Obligations. Regardless
of any instruction from the Borrower, if the Administration determines that action is needed to
preserve and maintain the Collateral, the Borrower authorizes the Administration to take such
actions. Following the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default the
Administration: (a) may at any time take such steps as the Administration deems necessary to
protect the Administration’s interest in and to preserve the Collateral, and (b) shall have, and is
hereby granted, a right of ingress and egress to places where the Collateral is located, and may
proceed over and through any of Borrower’s owned or leased property. All of the Administration’s
expenses of preserving the Collateral shall be charged to the Borrower’s account and added to the
Obligations.
6. Authorization and Power-of-Attorney. The Borrower authorizes and designates the
Administration (which appointment is coupled with an interest), irrevocably and with power of
substitution, to take any action authorized under this Agreement or the Financing Documents,
whether in the name of the Administration or the Borrower. The Borrower hereby also irrevocably
authorizes and directs all accountants and auditors employed by Borrower at any time while the
Loan remains outstanding to exhibit and deliver to the Administration copies of any of Borrower’s
financial statements, trial balances or other accounting records of any sort in the accountant’s or
auditor’s possession, and to disclose to the Administration any information they may have
concerning Borrower’s financial status and business operations.
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
7
7. Performance by Administration. If the Borrower fails to comply with any term of
this Agreement, the Administration, without notice or demand to the Borrower and without
waiving or releasing any of the Borrower's Obligations or any Event of Default, may (but is not
obligated to) perform any act necessary or appropriate to comply with such terms for the account
and at the expense of the Borrower, and may enter upon any of the Borrower’s Facilities for that
purpose. Expenses paid, and costs (including collection fees and expenses) incurred, by the
Administration in connection with the foregoing (collectively, the “Expense Payments”), together
with interest thereon at a per annum rate of interest equal to 12 % per annum from the date the
Administration notifies the Borrower in writing of the Expense Payments, until repaid in full, shall
be paid by the Borrower to the Administration on demand and shall become a part of the
Borrower's Obligations secured under this Agreement.
8. Events of Default. The occurrence of any one or more of the following events shall
constitute an Event of Default under this Agreement:
8.1. The Borrower fails to pay the principal amount of the Loan and any
applicable interest thereon according to the terms of the Note or any other payment required by
any of the Financing Documents, including the Borrower's Obligations and failure to cure such
event within 30 days of written notice to Borrower;
8.2. The Borrower ceases to use the Project for the purposes listed on Exhibit A
to the Loan Agreement, as contemplated in the Loan Agreement, the Application, and the
Commitment Letter for more than 30 days after written notice of default shall have been provided
from the Administration to the Borrower;
8.3. If, for any cause whatsoever, except for strikes, acts of God, or other causes
beyond the reasonable control of the Borrower, the construction of the Project is at any time
discontinued for a period of 30 days, or if the Project, as determined by the Administration, has
not been completed or is not progressing in accordance with the Application and the certified
energy savings contained in the Application;
8.4. Any Loan proceeds are used for any purpose other than Eligible Project
Costs as defined in the Loan Agreement;
8.5. The Borrower breaches any covenant, representation, warranty, or other
provision of any of the other Financing Documents, subject to any applicable cure periods;
8.6 Any statement made in any certificate, report or opinion (including legal
opinions), financial statement, or other document furnished in connection with the Loan was
incorrect in any material respect when made;
8.7 The Borrower breaches any covenant, representation, warranty, or other
provision of this Agreement, which breach is not cured within 30 days from the date the Borrower
receives written notice of the breach from the Administration; provided, however that the
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
8
Borrower shall not receive a 30-day cure period under this subsection for any breach for which
there is a specific default set forth in this section;
8.8 Any change in any zoning ordinance or any other public restriction is
enacted which limits or defines the uses that may be made on any part of the Project, so that the
use of the Project would be in violation of the restriction or zoning change and the Project would
not be useable for a purpose consistent with the Act (as set for the in the Annotated Code of
Maryland State Government Article §9–20A–03) for more than 10 days after written notice of
default shall have been provided from the Administration to the Borrower;
8.9 Any portion of, or interest in, the Project is sold, leased, subleased,
transferred, encumbered, or otherwise conveyed, without the prior written consent of the
Administration;
8.10 The Borrower fails to comply with any requirement of any Governmental
Authority within 30 days after written notice of the requirement is made or within any other time
period set by the Governmental Authority; or if any proceeding is commenced or action taken to
enforce any remedy for a violation of any requirement of a Governmental Authority or any
restrictive covenant affecting any part of the Project;
8.11 A default occurs under the terms of any bond, debenture, note, or other
evidence of indebtedness of the Borrower and remains uncured beyond any applicable grace or
cure period;
8.12 Any court of competent jurisdiction makes a final order:
(i) Adjudicating the Borrower a bankrupt,
(ii) Appointing a trustee or receiver of a substantial part of the property of the
Borrower,
(iii) Approving a petition for, or affecting an arrangement in, bankruptcy, a
reorganization pursuant to federal bankruptcy law, or any other judicial modification or alterations
of the rights of the Administration or of other creditors of the Borrower,
(iv) Assuming custody or sequestering any substantial part of the property of the
Borrower, or
(v) Attaching or garnishing any substantial part of the property of the Borrower;
(vi) Or if the Borrower:
A. Files such petition,
B. Takes or consents to any other actions seeking any such judicial
order,
C. Makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors,
D. Fails to pay debts generally as they become due, or
E. Makes an admission in writing of inability to pay debts generally as
they become due;
8.13 A permanent or preliminary injunction is issued that lasts for more than 90
days, that prohibits the Borrower from using the Project as set forth in the Application and the
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
9
Commitment Letter for more than 10 days after written notice of default shall have been provided
from the Administration to the Borrower;
8.14 Without the prior written consent of the Administration, the Borrower:
(i) Sells or transfers all or substantially all of its business assets,
(ii) Begins any proceeding to dissolve or liquidate,
(iii) Changes the form of business entity through which it presently conducts its
business, or
(iv) Merges or consolidates;
8.15 Without the prior written consent of the Administration, the Borrower is
dissolved by operation of law or in any other manner;
8.16 The Administration makes a good faith determination that a Material
Adverse Change has occurred;
8.17 The Administration makes a good faith determination that the prospect of
payment of any of the Borrower's Obligations is impaired for any reason; or
8.18 An Event of Default occurs under the terms of any of the other Financing
Documents.
9. Rights and Remedies of the Administration.
9.1. Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, the Administration may,
without notice or demand, exercise in any jurisdiction in which enforcement hereof is sought, the
following rights and remedies, in addition to the rights and remedies available to the
Administration under the other Financing Documents, the Maryland Uniform Commercial Code,
or any other applicable law:
(a) Require the immediate repayment of the entire outstanding principal
indebtedness, together with all accrued interest, under the Note and any Obligations, without
presentment, demand, protest, or notice, all of which the Borrower expressly waives;
(b) At any time proceed to protect and enforce all rights and remedies
available to the Administration under this Agreement or by Law, by any other proceedings,
whether for specific performance of any agreement contained in this Agreement, damages, or other
relief;
(c) Take possession of the Collateral, and enter any of the Borrower’s
Facilities and remove the Collateral without any liability to the Administration, the Borrower
hereby waiving any and all rights to prior notice and to judicial hearing concerning repossession
of the Collateral, and require the Borrower, at the Borrower’s expense, to assemble and deliver the
Collateral to any place designated by the Administration.
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
10
(d) Operate, manage, and control the Collateral (including use of the
Collateral and any other property or assets of the Borrower in order to continue or complete
performance of the Borrower’s obligations under any contracts of the Borrower), or permit any of
the Collateral to remain idle, and collect all rents and revenues therefrom and sell or otherwise
dispose of any of the Collateral upon any terms and conditions as the Administration may
determine, and purchase or acquire any of the Collateral at any such sale or other disposition, all
to the extent permitted by applicable law.
(e) Enforce the Borrower’s rights against any account borrower or
other parties obligated on the Collateral.
9.2. Power of Attorney. Effective upon the occurrence of an Event of Default,
the Borrower hereby designates and appoints the Administration and its designees as attorney-in-
fact of the Borrower, irrevocably and with power of substitution, with authority to endorse the
Borrower’s name on any notes, acceptances, checks, drafts, money orders, instruments or other
evidences of payment or proceeds of the Collateral that may come into the Administration’s
possession; to execute proofs of claim or loss; to adjust and compromise any claims under
insurance policies; and to perform all other acts necessary and advisable to enforce this Agreement
and the other Financing Documents. All acts of the attorney or designee are hereby ratified and
approved by the Borrower and said attorney or designee shall not be liable for any acts of
commission or omission, any error of judgment, or any mistake of fact or law. This power of
attorney is coupled with an interest and is irrevocable so long as any of the Borrower’s Obligations
remain unpaid or unperformed or there exists any commitment by the Administration which could
give rise to any Borrower’s Obligations.
9.3. Notice of Disposition of Collateral and Disclaimer of Warranties. It is
mutually agreed that commercial reasonableness and good faith require the Administration to give
the Borrower no more than 5 days prior written notice of the time and place of any public
disposition of Collateral or of the time after which any private disposition or any other intended
disposition is to be made. It is mutually agreed that it is commercially reasonable for the
Administration to disclaim all warranties which arise with respect to the disposition of the
Collateral.
9.4. Costs and Expenses. The Borrower agrees to pay to the Administration on
demand (a) the amount of all Expenses paid or incurred by the Administration in consulting with
counsel concerning any of its rights hereunder, under the Financing Documents or under applicable
law, (b) all Expenses, including attorneys’ fees and court costs incurred by the Administration in
exercising or enforcing any of its rights under this Agreement, the Financing Documents, or
applicable law, together with interest thereon at a rate of interest equal to 12% per annum from
the date the Administration notifies the Borrower in writing of such costs or expenses incurred,
until repaid in full, and (c) the portion of the Administration’s overhead that the Administration
allocates to collection and enforcement of the Borrower’s Obligations (“Enforcement Costs”).
Any proceeds of sale or other disposition of the Collateral will be applied by the Administration
to the payment of the Enforcement Costs and Expense Payments, and any remaining proceeds will
be applied by the Administration to the payment of the remaining Borrower's Obligations in any
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
11
order and manner elected by the Administration. The provisions of this subsection shall survive
the termination of this Agreement and the Administration’s security interest hereunder and the
payment of all Borrower’s Obligations.
10. Deficiency. If the sale or other disposition of the Collateral fails to fully satisfy the
Borrower's Obligations, the Borrower shall remain liable to the Administration for any deficiency.
11. Remedies Cumulative. Each right and remedy of the Administration set forth in
this Agreement or the other Financing Documents, or now or hereafter existing at law, in equity,
by statute, or otherwise shall be cumulative and concurrent and shall be in addition to every other
right or remedy available to the Administration. The exercise of any right or remedy shall not
preclude the simultaneous or later exercise of any other right or remedy.
12. Waiver. A failure or delay by the Administration to insist upon the strict
performance of any term of this Agreement or the other Financing Documents, or to exercise any
right or remedy for any breach thereof, shall not constitute a waiver of that term or breach and
shall not preclude the Administration from exercising any right or remedy at a later time. By
accepting payment after the due date of any of the Borrower's Obligations, the Administration
shall not be deemed to have waived the right either to require payment when due of all other
Borrower's Obligations or to declare an Event of Default for failure to effect payment of any future
Borrower's Obligations. The Borrower waives presentment, notice of dishonor, and notice of non-
payment with respect to accounts and chattel paper.
13. Miscellaneous.
13.1. The headings of this Agreement are for convenience only and shall not limit
or otherwise affect any of the terms of this Agreement. In the event of any conflict between the
Loan Agreement and this Agreement, the Loan Agreement shall control.
13.2. This Agreement may only be changed, waived, discharged, or terminated
by an instrument in writing signed by the party against whom enforcement is sought.
13.3. This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of Maryland.
Any action instituted against the Borrower under this Agreement or against the Collateral may be
brought in any court of competent jurisdiction located in the State of Maryland.
13.4. This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, personal representatives,
successors, and assigns of the Borrower and shall inure to the benefit of the successors and assigns
of the Administration.
13.5. As used in this Agreement, the singular number shall include the plural, the
plural the singular, and the use of the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender shall include all
genders, as the context may require, and the term “person” shall include an individual, a
corporation, an association, a partnership, a trust, and an organization.
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
12
13.6. Unless varied by this Agreement, the Loan Agreement, or the Financing
Documents, all terms used herein which are defined by the Maryland Uniform Commercial Code
shall have the same meanings in this Agreement as assigned to them by the Maryland Uniform
Commercial Code.
13.7. All decisions or determinations which may be made by the Administration
under this Agreement shall be in the sole discretion of the Administration.
13.8. The invalidity of any part of this Agreement shall not affect the validity of
the remaining provisions of this Agreement.
[Signature page to follow]
Administration Security Agreement
Draft Version
Lawton Loan #202*-**-L0047
13
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Borrower has caused this Agreement to be executed and
delivered under seal as of the date written below.
WITNESS:
THE SECURITIES SET FORTH HEREIN ARE BEING OFFERED PURSUANT TO SECTION
4(A)(6) OF THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933. THE SECURITIES HAVE NOT BEEN
REGISTERED UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933 OR THE SECURITIES LAWS OF
ANY STATE OR ANY OTHER JURISDICTION. THERE ARE FURTHER RESTRICTIONS
ON THE TRANSFERABILITY OF THE SECURITIES DESCRIBED HEREIN.
THE PURCHASE OF THE SECURITIES INVOLVES A HIGH DEGREE OF RISK AND
SHOULD BE CONSIDERED ONLY BY PERSONS WHO CAN BEAR THE RISK OF THE
LOSS OF THEIR ENTIRE INVESTMENT.
Subscription Agreement
PREFERRED UNITS
IN
TOOTHY COW PRODUCTIONS, LLC
The undersigned (the “Investor”) represents and understands that Toothy Cow Productions,
LLC, a Tennessee limited liability company, (the “Issuer”), is offering up to 3,333,333 shares of
its Preferred Units (the “Securities”), for $1.50 per unit (the “Purchase Price”) in a Regulation
CF offering (the “Offering”) subject to Issuer’s Form C SEC filing (the “Form C”) and the
Issuer’s operating agreement, dated as of March 9, 2021 (the “Operating Agreement”)
(collectively, the Operating Agreement together with Form C, are the “Offering Documents”),
each as may be amended. The Investor further understands that the Offering is being made
without registration of the Securities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), or any securities law of any state of the United States or of any other
jurisdiction. The Offering has a minimum amount raised target of $500,000 (the “Target
Offering Amount”) and a maximum offering target of $5,000,000 (the “Maximum Offering
Amount”). The last day and time on which any investments may be made in the Offering and by
which the Target Offering Amount must be met is 11:59:59 on August 31, 2022 (the “Offering
Deadline”). Once the Offering reaches the Target Offering Amount, the Issuer may elect to hold
an initial Closing, as indicated below in Section 3 and continue to raise funds up to the
Maximum Offering Amount.
This Subscription Agreement (this “Subscription Agreement”) relates to Investor’s agreement
to purchase Securities in the amount set forth on the Signature Page hereto, to be issued by the
Issuer, subject to the terms, conditions, acknowledgements, representations and warranties stated
herein and in the Offering Documents for the sale of the Securities, as the same may be
supplemented or amended. Capitalized terms used but not defined herein shall have the
meanings given to them in the Offering Documents.
Investor understands that if Investor wishes to purchase Securities, Investor must complete this
Subscription Agreement and submit the applicable Subscription Price in accordance with the
instructions set forth in the Offering Documents and on “Angel Funding” (VAS Portal, LLC;
herinafter “the Portal”)’s page for this Offering. Investor understands that the purchase price per
unit of Securities is $1.50.
2
In order to induce the Company to accept this Subscription Agreement for Securities and as
further consideration for such acceptance, Investor hereby makes, adopts, confirms and agrees to
all of the following covenants, acknowledgements, representations and warranties with the full
knowledge that the Company and its affiliates will expressly rely thereon in making a decision to
accept or reject this Subscription Agreement.
1. Subscription. Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and the provisions of the
Offering Documents, the Investor hereby irrevocably subscribes for the Securities set forth on
the signature page hereto in the aggregate purchase amount or price there indicated (the “Total
Purchase Price”), which is payable as described in Section 4 hereof. The Investor acknowledges
that the Securities will be subject to restrictions on transfer as set forth in this Subscription
Agreement.
2. Acceptance of Subscription and Issuance of Securities. It is understood and agreed that
the Issuer shall have the sole right, in its complete discretion, to accept or reject this subscription,
in whole or in part, for any reason and that the same shall be deemed to be accepted by the Issuer
only when Investor has received a confirmation of closed investment notice from the Portal.
Subscriptions need not be accepted in the order received, and the Securities may be allocated
among subscribers.
3. The Closing. The closing of the purchase and sale of the Securities shall take place as
soon as reasonably possible after the Offering Deadline or at such earlier time as set by Issuer
(the “Closing”), subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Offering may not close if the cumulative subscriptions in the Offering have
not reached the Target Offering Amount by the Offering Deadline.
(b) The Offering may not close until the Offering has been open to the public for at
least twenty-one (21) days after opening.
(c) The Offering may not close for any individual subscriber until such subscriber’s
identity is verified with the escrow agent (the “Escrow Agent”), and their funds
have cleared the escrow account (the “Escrow Account”).
(d) If the Issuer sets a Closing earlier than the Offering Deadline, the Issuer shall send
a notice five days prior to the Closing to all investors who have committed to
invest in the Offering through a subscription agreement granting them an
opportunity to cancel their commitment up to forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
Closing. This notice will also identify if the Issuer will continue to accept
commitments up to the Closing and Offering Deadline.
(e) The Offering may close in batches after the Offering Deadline as requirements are
met for any such batch of subscribers.
4. Payment for Securities. The Investor shall pay to the Issuer the Total Purchase Price at
the time of entering into this Subscription Agreement. Investor may pay the Total Purchase
Price by ACH, credit card, or wire transfer subject to limitations set forth in this agreement or
3
through the Portal’s technology. Payment shall be submitted to the Escrow Agent and held by
the Escrow Agent until such time that it is either refunded to the Investor or distributed to the
Issuer. If payment is never received by the Escrow Agent, Investor’s subscription will be
canceled.
5. Termination. The Issuer and Investor may terminate this Subscription Agreement as
follows:
(a) The Investor may terminate this Subscription Agreement for any reason, but only
up to forty-eight (48) hours before the Closing, or if the Investor enters into this
Subscription Agreement during the last forty-eight (48) hours of the Offering, the
Investor may not terminate this Subscription Agreement.
(b) The Issuer may terminate this Subscription Agreement at any time and for any
reason up until the time that Investor’s subscription is accepted.
(c) The Issuer may terminate this Subscription Agreement after the Closing if the
Investor’s payment is subjected to a chargeback.
6. Representations and Warranties of the Issuer. As of the Closing, the Issuer represents and
warrants that:
(a) The Issuer is duly formed and validly existing under the laws of the state of
Tennessee, with full power and authority to conduct its business as it is currently being
conducted and to own its assets; and has secured any other authorizations, approvals, permits and
orders required by law for the conduct by the Issuer of its business as it is currently being
conducted.
(b) This Subscription Agreement, when executed and delivered by the Issuer, shall
constitute the valid and legally binding obligations of the Issuer, enforceable against the Issuer in
accordance with their respective terms except (i) as limited by applicable bankruptcy,
insolvency, reorganization, moratorium, fraudulent conveyance, or other laws of general
application relating to or affecting the enforcement of creditors’ rights generally, or (ii) as
limited by laws relating to the availability of specific performance, injunctive relief, or other
equitable remedies.
(c) The Securities, when issued, sold and delivered in accordance with the terms and
for the consideration set forth in this Subscription Agreement and the Offering Documents, will
be validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable.
7. Representations and Warranties of the Investor. The Investor hereby represents and
warrants to and covenants with the Issuer that:
(a) The Investor has the capacity to purchase the Securities, enter into this
Subscription Agreement and to perform all the obligations required to be performed by the
4
Investor hereunder, and such purchase will not contravene any law, rule or regulation binding on
the Investor or any investment guideline or restriction applicable to the Investor.
(b) The Investor is a resident of the state set forth on the signature page hereto and is
not acquiring the Securities as a nominee or agent or otherwise for any other person.
(c) The Investor is a citizen of the United States of America.
(d) The Investor is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(e) The Investor will comply with all applicable laws and regulations in effect in any
jurisdiction in which the Investor purchases or sells the Securities and obtain any consent,
approval or permission required for such purchases or sales under the laws and regulations of
any jurisdiction to which the Investor is subject or in which the Investor makes such purchases or
sales, and the Issuer shall have no responsibility therefor.
(f) The Investor has received a copy of the Offering Documents. The Investor has not
been furnished any offering literature other than the Offering Documents and has relied only on
the information contained therein.
(g) The Investor understands and accepts that the purchase of the Securities involves
various risks, including the risks outlined in the Offering Documents. The Investor represents
that it is able to bear any loss associated with an investment in the Securities.
(h) The Investor confirms that it is not relying on any communication (written or
oral) of the Issuer or any of its affiliates, as investment advice or as a recommendation to
purchase the Securities. It is understood that information and explanations related to the terms
and conditions of the Securities provided in the Offering Documents or otherwise by the Issuer
or any of its affiliates shall not be considered investment advice or a recommendation to
purchase the Securities, and that neither the Issuer nor any of its affiliates is acting or has acted
as an advisor to the Investor in deciding to invest in the Securities.
(i) The Investor is familiar with the business and financial condition and operations
of the Issuer, all as generally described in the Offering Documents. The Investor has had access
to such information concerning the Issuer and the Securities as it deems necessary to enable it to
make an informed investment decision concerning the purchase of the Securities.
(j) The Investor understands that each of the Investor's representations and warranties
contained in this Subscription Agreement will be deemed to have been reaffirmed and confirmed
as of the Closing, taking into account all information received by the Investor.
(k) The Investor acknowledges that the Issuer has the right in its sole and absolute
discretion to abandon the Offering at any time prior to the completion of the offering. This
Subscription Agreement shall thereafter have no force or effect and the Issuer shall cause the
Escrow Agent to return the previously paid Total Purchase Price of the Securities, without
interest thereon, to the Investor.
5
(l) The Investor understands that no federal or state agency has passed upon the
merits or risks of an investment in the Securities or made any finding or determination
concerning the fairness or advisability of this investment.
(m) The Investor represents that it is not relying on (and will not at any time rely on)
any communication (written or oral) of the Issuer, as investment advice or as a recommendation
to purchase the Securities, it being understood that information and explanations related to the
terms and conditions of the Securities and the other transaction documents that are described in
the Offering Documents shall not be considered investment advice or a recommendation to
purchase the Securities.
(n) The Investor confirms that the Issuer has not (A) given any guarantee or
representation as to the potential success, return, effect or benefit (either legal, regulatory, tax,
financial, accounting or otherwise) of an investment in the Securities or (B) made any
representation to the Investor regarding the legality of an investment in the Securities under
applicable legal investment or similar laws or regulations. In deciding to purchase the Securities,
the Investor is not relying on the advice or recommendations of the Issuer and the Investor has
made its own independent decision that the investment in the Securities is suitable and
appropriate for the Investor.
(o) The Investor has such knowledge, skill and experience in business, financial and
investment matters that the Investor is capable of evaluating the merits and risks of an
investment in the Securities. With the assistance of the Investor's own professional advisors, to
the extent that the Investor has deemed appropriate, the Investor has made its own legal, tax,
accounting and financial evaluation of the merits and risks of an investment in the Securities and
the consequences of this Subscription Agreement. The Investor has considered the suitability of
the Securities as an investment in light of its own circumstances and financial condition and the
Investor is able to bear the risks associated with an investment in the Securities.
(p) The Investor is aware of its investment limitations based on Investor’s annual net
income, net worth and previous investments through other regulation crowdfunding offerings
over the proceeding twelve month period and is compliant with such limitations based on the
Total Purchase Price.
(q) The Investor is acquiring the Securities solely for the Investor’s own beneficial
account, for investment purposes, and not with a view to, or for resale in connection with, any
distribution of the Securities. The Investor understands that the Securities have not been
registered under the Securities Act or any State Securities Laws by reason of specific exemptions
under the provisions thereof which depend in part upon the investment intent of the Investor and
of the other representations made by the Investor in this Subscription Agreement. The Investor
understands that the Issuer is relying upon the representations and agreements contained in this
Subscription Agreement (and any supplemental information) for the purpose of determining
whether this transaction meets the requirements for such exemptions.
(r) The Investor understands that the Securities are “restricted securities” under
applicable federal securities laws and that the Securities Act and the rules of the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (the “Commission”) provide in substance that the Investor may
6
dispose of the Securities only pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities
Act or an exemption therefrom, and the Investor understands that the Issuer has no obligation or
intention to register any of the Securities, or to take action so as to permit sales pursuant to the
Securities Act (including Rule 144 thereunder). Accordingly, the Investor understands that under
the Commission's rules, the Investor may dispose of the Securities principally only in “private
placements” which are exempt from registration under the Securities Act, in which event the
transferee will acquire “restricted securities” subject to the same limitations as in the hands of the
Investor. Consequently, the Investor understands that the Investor must bear the economic risks
of the investment in the Securities for an indefinite period of time.
(s) The Investor understands that the Securities may not be transferred by the
Investor for a period of one year unless any such transfer is made pursuant to the exemptions
found in the regulation crowdfunding statutes and rules.
(t) The Investor agrees: (A) that the Investor will not sell, assign, pledge, give,
transfer or otherwise dispose of the Securities or any interest therein, or make any offer or
attempt to do any of the foregoing, except pursuant to a registration of the Securities under the
Securities Act and all applicable State Securities Laws, or in a transaction which is exempt from
the registration provisions of the Securities Act and all applicable State Securities Laws; and (B)
that the Issuer and its affiliates shall not be required to give effect to any purported transfer of
such Securities except upon compliance with the foregoing restrictions and any restrictions set
forth in the Offering Documents.
8. Conditions to Obligations of the Investor and the Issuer. The obligations of the Investor
to purchase and pay for the Securities specified on the signature page and of the Issuer to sell the
Securities are subject to the satisfaction at or prior to the Closing of the following conditions
precedent: the representations and warranties of the Issuer contained in Section 6 hereof and of
the Investor contained in Section 7 hereof shall be true and correct as of the Closing in all
respects with the same effect as though such representations and warranties had been made as of
the Closing.
9. Obligations Irrevocable. The obligations of the Investor shall be irrevocable except as
allowed under the laws of Regulation Crowdfunding.
10. Waiver, Amendment. Once this Subscription Agreement has been accepted by both
parties, neither this Subscription Agreement nor any provisions hereof shall be modified,
changed, discharged or terminated except by an instrument in writing, signed by the party against
whom any waiver, change, discharge or termination is sought.
11. Assignability. Neither this Subscription Agreement nor any right, remedy, obligation or
liability arising hereunder or by reason hereof shall be assignable by either the Issuer or the
Investor without the prior written consent of the other party.
12. Waiver of Jury Trial. THE INVESTOR IRREVOCABLY WAIVES ANY AND ALL
RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY WITH RESPECT TO ANY LEGAL PROCEEDING ARISING
OUT OF THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED BY THIS SUBSCRIPTION
AGREEMENT.
7
13. Submission to Jurisdiction. With respect to any suit, action or proceeding relating to any
offers, purchases or sales of the Securities by the Investor (“Proceedings”), the Investor
irrevocably submits to the jurisdiction of the federal or state chancery courts located in the
County of Williamson, Franklin, Tennessee, which submission shall be exclusive unless none of
such courts has lawful jurisdiction over such Proceedings.
14. Governing Law. This Subscription Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of Tennessee.
15. Section and Other Headings. The section and other headings contained in this
Subscription Agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this Subscription Agreement.
16. Counterparts. This Subscription Agreement may be executed in any number of
counterparts, each of which when so executed and delivered shall be deemed to be an original
and all of which together shall be deemed to be one and the same agreement.
17. Notices. All notices and other communications provided for herein shall be by email and
shall be deemed to have been duly given on the day on which the receiver received such email if
sent prior to 5:00 PM in the receiver’s time and on the following business day if sent after 5:00
PM.
18. Binding Effect. The provisions of this Subscription Agreement shall be binding upon and
accrue to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective heirs, legal representatives,
successors and assigns.
19. Survival. All representations, warranties and covenants contained in this Subscription
Agreement shall survive (i) the acceptance of the subscription by the Issuer and the Closing, (ii)
changes in the transactions, documents and instruments described in the Offering Documents
which are not material or which are to the benefit of the Investor and (iii) the death or disability
of the Investor.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
8
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Investor has executed this Subscription Agreement on:
_________________________ _________, _____________
Month Day Year
INVESTOR:
By:
Signature
Name:
Print
State or Territory, and Country of Domicile: ____________________________________
Aggregate Subscription Amount: US$_________________________________________
The offer to purchase Securities as set forth above is confirmed and accepted by the Issuer
as to __________ shares of preferred units.
Date: _________________________________
IMRF STANDARD INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT
THIS INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT made and entered into as of the
____day of ______, 20_, by and between the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, (“IMRF”) an
Illinois public pension fund and a body politic and corporate, and ____________
( the “Investment Manager”), a ____________________________________________________.
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, Paragraph III-I of the IMRF Master Trust Agreement (the “Master Trust”)
entered into by and between IMRF, located at Oak Brook, Illinois, and The Northern Trust
Company, an Illinois corporation, located at Chicago, Illinois (the “Master Trustee”) authorizes
IMRF to appoint one or more Investment Managers who shall have the power to manage, acquire
or dispose of such portion of the Master Trust assets as IMRF shall determine from time to time;
and
WHEREAS, IMRF and the Investment Manager now desire to enter into this Investment
Management Agreement;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual premises and agreement herein
contained, and pursuant to the authority vested in IMRF, IT IS AGREED by the parties hereto as
follows:
1. Appointment of Investment Manager. IMRF hereby appoints the Investment Manager
to, in its sole discretion, direct the Master Trustee under the Master Trust, with respect to
the investment and reinvestment of such portion of the Master Trust assets as IMRF
shall identify and decide from time to time, the proceeds from the sale of such assets and
the income attributable to such assets (the “Fund”). The nature of the investments and
other matters concerning the services to be performed shall be as set forth in this
agreement, including the Exhibits hereto (this “Agreement”).
2. Investment Guidelines and Policies. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1, the
Investment Manager shall act hereunder in accordance with the applicable requirements
of the Illinois Pension Code, 40 ILCS 5/ et seq. (the “Code”) and the written investment
policy and written investment guidelines (“Investment Guidelines”) for the Fund
provided to it by IMRF, and attached hereto as Exhibit A. The Investment Manager
acknowledges that it has received and reviewed a copy of the IMRF Statement of
Investment Policy adopted by the IMRF Board of Trustees on ________________ (the
“Investment Policy”), which is available on-line at www.imrf.org, and that such
Investment Policy is subject to change at any time at the sole and absolute discretion of
IMRF. IMRF shall endeavor to promptly advise the Investment Manager with respect to
any amendment of such statutes and of any change in such policy and the Investment
Manager shall have a reasonable period of time to comply with any such amendments.
Any change to the Investment Guidelines shall be agreed with the Investment Manager
and Exhibit A shall be revised to reflect any such change. IMRF represents to the
Investment Manager that the Investment Guidelines are and will continue to be
compliant with applicable Illinois laws and regulations.
3. Master Trustee. IMRF has informed the Master Trustee of the appointment of the
Investment Manager in accordance with the provisions of the Master Trust and the
Master Trustee, by virtue of its acceptance of the trusteeship, has agreed to act in
accordance with the direction of the Investment Manager during the term of this
Investment Management Agreement.
4. Standard of Care. The Investment Manager hereby accepts its appointment,
acknowledges that it is registered as an investment adviser under the Investment
Advisers Act of 1940 (“Advisers Act”), that it will promptly advise IMRF if it at any
time is not so registered, that it is bonded in accordance with the provisions of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), and that, with respect to
the assets in the Fund, it is a fiduciary under ERISA with respect to IMRF and without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Investment Manager specifically agrees to
perform its duties under this Investment Management Agreement with the care, skill,
prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man
acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in an enterprise of like
character and with like aims (the “Standard of Care”).
5. Ownership of Assets. The indicia of ownership of the assets of the Master Trust
constituting the Fund shall be held by the Master Trustee at all times.
6. Other Activities; Allocation of Opportunities. Except as otherwise specifically agreed, in
writing, by the parties hereto, nothing in this Investment Management Agreement shall
be construed to restrict the right of the Investment Manager and its officers to act and
continue to act as investment managers for others or to perform investment management
or other services for any person or entity. The performance of such services for others
by the Investment Manager and its officers shall not violate the terms of this Investment
Management Agreement in any way.
Nothing in this Investment Management Agreement shall be construed to limit or restrict
the Investment Manager or any of its officers, affiliates or employees from buying,
selling or trading in any securities for its or their own account or accounts. IMRF
acknowledges that the Investment Manager and its officers, affiliates, employees and
other clients may at any time have, acquire, increase, decrease or dispose of positions in
investments which are at the same time being acquired or disposed of by the Master
Trustee at the direction of the Investment Manager.
The Investment Manager shall have no obligation to direct the Master Trustee to acquire
for the Master Trust a position in any investment which the Investment Manager, its
officers, affiliates, or employees may acquire for its or their own accounts or for the
account of another client, if, in the sole discretion of the Investment Manager, it is not
feasible or desirable to acquire a position in such investment for the Master Trust.
2
7. Notice of Certain Changes. The Investment Manager shall promptly notify IMRF in
writing (i) if more than 7.5% of the ownership interest in the Investment Manager is
acquired by any person or entity other than through the issuance of additional
Partnership Points to current Partners or employees of the Investment Manager or (ii) in
the event of any change in control or business reorganization of the Investment
Manager. In addition, the Investment Manager shall promptly notify IMRF in writing of
any change in, or departure of, (i) the lead portfolio manager or the lead researcher of
the Investment Manager or (ii) any senior investment personnel responsible for the
management of the assets of the Fund at any Sub-Adviser.
8. Regulatory Matters. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, during the term of
this Agreement, the Investment Manager shall promptly advise IMRF in writing of any
investigation, examination (other than routine examinations provided, however, that all
findings letters that identify material issues or compliance infractions shall be promptly
disclosed to IMRF), complaint, disciplinary action or other proceeding involving the
Investment Manager or to Manager’s knowledge , any Sub-Adviser, or any of their
respective affiliates or any executive or professional employed by the Investment
Manager, any Sub-Adviser or any of their respective affiliates relating to or affecting the
Investment Manager’s or Sub-Adviser’s ability to perform its respective duties, and
manage the Fund, which is commenced by the U.S. Securities Exchange Commission, or
any other federal or state governmental, regulatory or self-regulatory or agency or
organization, or any state Attorney General, or any foreign governmental, regulatory or
self-regulatory agency or organization of any state in the United States or any
international regulatory agency.
9. Meetings and Information. Upon IMRF’s reasonable request, the Investment Manager
shall attend meetings with IMRF to review and apprise IMRF of the Fund’s investment
activities pursuant to this Agreement. Upon request, the Investment Manager shall also
furnish to IMRF information regarding assets and asset classes in which the Investment
Manager has or may invest in on behalf of IMRF and an overview of specific market
conditions.
10. Authorized Persons. Upon execution of this Agreement, the Investment Manager shall
provide IMRF with a written certification setting forth the persons authorized to act on
behalf of the Investment Manager with respect to the Fund. The Investment Manager
shall promptly update and provide a revised certification to IMRF upon any change to
the list of authorized persons previously provided to IMRF.
11. Brokers; Soft Dollars. Except as provided below in this paragraph, the brokerage firm
or firms that are to act as a securities broker with respect to the purchase and sale of
assets of the Master Trust allocated to the Fund shall be selected by the Investment
Manager in its sole discretion. Subject at all times to compliance with its fiduciary
obligations, the Investment Manager shall select such firm or firms in accordance with
IMRF’s policy on goals for the utilization of minority broker-dealers as set forth in the
3
Investment Policy. The Investment Manager or any entity controlled by or controlling
it, or affiliated with it, shall not act as an executing broker with respect to purchases and
sales or assets allocated to the Fund unless IMRF specifically approves such action. The
Investment Manager and any Sub-Adviser shall not engage in soft dollar transactions for
the Fund.
12. Insurance. (a) The Investment Manager represents that there currently exists in full
force and effect an insurance policy or policies protecting the Investment Manager (and
each of its officers, directors, shareholders, partners and/or employees) against liability
or loss for breaches of fiduciary responsibility (including, without limitation, breaches of
fiduciary responsibility under ERISA), and the coverage limitations of such policy or
policies equal or exceed $10,000,000 and the deductible of such policy does not exceed
$250,000; the Investment Manager warrants and agrees that such insurance policy or
policies shall be maintained at all times while this Agreement is in effect and (b) the
Investment Manager shall maintain throughout the term of this Agreement the following
insurance coverages: Professional Liability Insurance including Errors & Omissions
($10 million limit) covering Investment Manager’s fiduciary responsibility for all
services, Financial Institutional Blanket Bond Coverage including Computer Crime
(covering Employee Dishonesty ($10 million limit)), Commercial General Liability ($1
million each occurrence) and Umbrella Liability coverage ($4 million each occurrence)
and Workers’ Compensation with statutory benefits, and any other insurance required by
law of the Investment Manager. The Investment Manager shall provide IMRF with
certificates of insurance showing their respective coverages prior to the commencement
of any work hereunder, and the Investment Manager warrants and agrees that it shall
provide IMRF with notice of any adverse change to, or termination of, any of the
foregoing policies. The Blanket Bond Coverage shall name the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund as a loss payee. These coverages and limits shall not be deemed a
limitation on the Investment Manager’s liability under the indemnities granted to IMRF
under this Agreement.
13. Proxy Voting. IMRF shall direct the Master Trustee with respect to the voting of
proxies relating to securities held by the Master Trustee in the Fund.
14. Legal Actions. The Investment Manager shall not be responsible for the handling of any
legal proceedings, including class actions and bankruptcies (each, a “Legal Action”),
with respect to securities purchased or held in the Fund. The Master Trustee shall have
the responsibility for forwarding to IMRF any related notices and communications sent
by the issuers or other third parties and for processing any and all consents and
supporting documentation required in connection with the Fund’s participation in any
such Legal Action. To the extent it has notice of a Legal Action, the Investment
Manager shall provide reasonable cooperation and assistance to the Master Trustee in its
preparation and execution of any Legal Action filings on behalf of the Fund. The
Investment Manager has no obligation to file proofs of claims relating to the securities
4
comprising the Fund or unless the Investment Manager has knowledge, notify IMRF or
the Master Trustee of class action settlements or bankruptcies relating to the Fund.
15. Fund Transactions. The Investment Manager shall report all Fund transactions on a
daily basis to the Master Trustee and IMRF’s Bloomberg account. In addition, the
Investment Manager shall furnish IMRF, on a monthly basis, with the additional reports
and information described in Exhibit A or requested pursuant to Section [20] of this
Agreement. The Investment Manager shall also maintain, and make available to IMRF,
a log of all transactions placed through all securities brokerage firms, which log shall
reflect the name of the firm, a description of each transaction (including the amount and
securities involved), the date of each transaction and the amount of fees and
commissions paid.
16. Fees. The Investment Manager will be compensated for its performance of services
hereunder in such manner and amount as may be agreed by IMRF and the Investment
Manager from time to time. Such amount shall be the sole compensation owing by
IMRF to any person by reason of the services provided under this Investment
Management Agreement and shall be as set forth in Exhibit B to this Agreement.
17. Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, the Investment
Manager shall be liable, and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless IMRF and its
beneficiaries, officers, directors, employees and representatives (individually, an “IMRF
Indemnified Person”) from and against any liability, claim, loss, damage, expense
(including reasonable attorneys’ fees), or judgment incurred by or imposed upon a
IMRF Indemnified Person arising directly or indirectly out of the performance of the
duties or services by the Investment Manager (including, for the purpose of this Section
[17], the services provided by its officers, directors, employees, affiliates,
representatives, the Sub-Contractor and the Sub-Advisers) hereunder, but only to the
extent caused by negligence, breach of the Standard of Care, bad faith, fraud, willful
malfeasance, breach of a representation or warranty contained in this Agreement, failure
to perform its duties and obligations under this Agreement, or violation of applicable
law or regulation, and shall, at the request of IMRF, defend any such actions brought
against any IMRF Indemnified Person based upon any such claims or demands, and the
cost of such defense shall be borne by the Investment Manager and shall not constitute
any expense of, nor shall be paid out of, the Fund assets. This Section [17] shall survive
the termination of this Agreement.
18. Exculpation. Except as set forth in Section [17], the Investment Manager will not be
liable to IMRF for:
a) any loss arising from the Investment Manager’s adherence to IMRF’s
instructions; or
b) any act or failure to act by the custodian, any trustee, any broker or dealer
to which the Investment Manager directs transactions for the Fund;
5
provided, however, that the Investment Manager shall select such brokers
and dealers with reasonable care.
Except as set forth in Section [17], the Investment Guidelines shall not be deemed
to be breached as a result of the occurrence of any of the following events:
i.) any changes in price or value of any Investment which is brought
about solely through movements in the market;
ii.) any change in the composition of any benchmark set out in the
Investment Guidelines;
iii.) any issue, redemption or cancellation of investments by, or capital
reconstruction of, a company or issuer whose investments are held
in the Fund or to which the Fund has exposure;
iv.) any change in rating of an investment held in the Fund or to which
the Fund has exposure, or any issuer of any such investment;
v.) any change in Investment Guidelines directed by IMRF, including
changes to lists of restricted securities; or
vi.) any withdrawal of cash by IMRF.
The federal and state securities laws impose liabilities under certain circumstances
on persons who act in good faith, and therefore nothing in this Agreement will
waive or limit any rights that IMRF may have under those laws. Nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to protect the Investment Manager against any
liability to IMRF by reason of a breach of the Standard of Care or breach of its
fiduciary duties under the Advisers Act, or violation of applicable law.
19. Force Majeure. Neither party to this Agreement shall be liable for any failure or delay
in performing any of its obligations under or pursuant to the Agreement, and any such
failure or delay in performing its obligations will not constitute a breach of the
Agreement, if such failure or delay is as a result of nationalization, strikes,
expropriation, devaluation, seizure, or similar action by any governmental authority, de
facto or de jure, or enactment, promulgation, imposition or enforcement by any such
governmental authority of currency restrictions, exchange controls, levies or other
charges affecting the Fund’s property; or the breakdown, failure or malfunction of any
utilities or telecommunications systems; or any order or regulation of any banking or
securities industry, including changes in market rules and conditions affecting the
execution or settlement of transactions; or acts of war, terrorism, insurrection or
revolution; or acts of God or any other similar event. The Investment Manager shall use
reasonable commercial efforts to mitigate any losses resulting from such events and
shall maintain a commercially reasonable business recovery plan. Any such non-
6
performing party shall provide prompt notice to the other party of such circumstances
and shall be entitled to a reasonable extension of the time for performing such
obligations.
20. Additional Reports. At such times as IMRF may request, the Investment Manager shall
deliver to it such written reports and statements relating to its management of the Fund
as may be requested. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Investment
Manager shall provide IMRF with a monthly written report and analysis of the
investment results of the Fund. All returns on investment shall be reported as net returns
after payment of all fees, commissions, and any other compensation.
21. Assignment. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the rights and obligations
of IMRF and the Investment Manager under this Investment Management Agreement
may not be assigned without the prior written consent of the other.
22. Notices. All notices required by this Investment Management Agreement will be
properly given if addressed to the respective parties, as follows:
to the Investment Manager:
to IMRF:
Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
Louis W. Kosiba, Executive Director
2211 York Road, Suite 500
Oak Brook, IL 60523-2337
Facsimile: 630-368-5383
Email: lkosiba@imrf.org
Any notice required under this Investment Management Agreement may be
waived by the person entitled to notice.
23. Term; Termination. The term of this Investment Management Agreement shall
commence on the day and year first above written and shall continue until the date on
which it is terminated by IMRF, or the Investment Manager, upon 30 days’ advance
written notice to the other; provided, however, that at any time, without prior written
notice, IMRF may orally direct the Investment Manager to immediately cease all trading
and management activities with respect to the Fund, which direction shall be confirmed,
in writing, as soon as practicable.
7
24. Process Upon Termination. The Investment Manager shall cooperate with IMRF in
good faith to affect a smooth and orderly transfer of such services and all applicable
records as directed by IMRF to a successor manager.
Should the Investment Manager exercise its right to terminate this Agreement in
whole or in part, it shall bear the expense associated with the copying and moving
of records and material to any successor service provider(s).
On the effective date of termination of this Agreement or as close to such date as
is reasonably possible (but in no event more than 30 days after the date of
termination of this Agreement), the Investment Manager shall provide IMRF with
a final report for the Fund containing the same information as provided in the
monthly investment report. Any termination of this Agreement shall not relieve
the Investment Manager of any liability that may be incurred in connection with
its activities under this Agreement, which liability, shall survive the termination
of this Agreement.
25. Finders. Except as set forth in the Disclosure Schedule attached hereto as Exhibit C, the
Investment Manager certifies that no finder’s fee or finder’s commission has been paid
or shall be paid to any individual or organization resulting from the establishment of this
investment management relationship with IMRF.
26. Disclosure Schedule. The Investment Manager warrants and represents that the
statements in the Disclosure Schedule attached hereto as Exhibit C are true, accurate and
complete in all material respects. The Investment Manager shall update the Disclosure
Schedule promptly after any change in facts or circumstances which would cause any of
such statements to no longer be true, accurate or complete in all material respects.
27. Notice of Tax Liabilities. The Investment Manager acknowledges IMRF’s
representation that it is a tax-exempt entity under U.S. federal, state and local laws, and
that it has never been subject to, and is unlikely to be subject to, any tax withholding
requirements of the U.S. federal, state or local laws. The Investment Manager (a) shall
promptly notify IMRF if, at any time, the Investment Manager receives notice or
becomes aware that IMRF is required to pay taxes to any government or to file any
returns or other tax documents with respect to income or gains earned by the Account;
(b) to the extent reasonably feasible and subject to any applicable requirements of law,
including laws relating to the timing, withholding and payment of taxes, before
withholding and paying over to any United States or foreign taxing authority any
amount purportedly representing a tax liability of IMRF related to the Fund or this
Agreement, the Investment Manager shall provide IMRF and the Master Trustee with
written notice of the claim of any United States or foreign taxing authority that such
withholding and payment is required by law, that the Investment Manager receives
notice of and will provide IMRF with the opportunity to contest (at IMRF’s expense)
8
such claim; provided that such contest does not subject the Investment Manager to any
potential liability to such taxing authority for any such claimed withholding and
payment; and (c) upon request of the Master Trustee, the Investment Manager (i) shall
cooperate with and assist the Master Trustee and IMRF in their efforts to obtain any
exemption available from withholding and other taxes imposed by any non-U.S. taxing
authority with respect to amounts received by the Fund or distributable to IMRF with
respect to the Fund (“Foreign Withholding Taxes”), (ii) notify the Master Trustee and
IMRF of the amount of any Foreign Withholding Taxes imposed of which the
Investment Manager becomes aware, (iii) cooperate with and assist the Master Trustee
and IMRF with the procedures for obtaining any available refund of such Foreign
Withholding Taxes to the extent the Investment Manager has knowledge, (iv) upon
request, provide the Master Trustee and IMRF with such other information or
documentation as is reasonably available to the Investment Manager and is relevant to
IMRF’s application for a refund of Foreign Withholding Taxes and otherwise cooperate
with the Master Trustee and IMRF in their preparation of such application and (v) upon
request, provide such reasonable assistance as requested by the Master Trustee and
IMRF in their preparation any tax returns or other documents.
28. Foreign Regulations. The Investment Manager agrees to use commercially reasonable
efforts to invest and manage the Fund in compliance with all foreign laws, rules and
regulations relating to ownership restrictions applicable to the investments held in the
Account (collectively, “Foreign Regulations”) in a manner intended to avoid IMRF or
the Fund from being directly subject to any Foreign Regulations with regard to any
filing, licensing, reporting, fees, fines or penalties in such foreign jurisdiction (a
“Regulatory Problem”), other than withholding taxes. In the event that IMRF
determines in its sole discretion that investments held by the Fund alone or together with
all other investments held by IMRF is reasonably likely to cause IMRF a Regulatory
Problem, the Investment Manager agrees in good faith to cooperate with and assist
IMRF’s efforts in eliminating such Regulatory Problem through the divestment of
investments held by the Fund or otherwise.
29. Borrowing and Lending. The Investment Manager shall not (i) lend to a third party
investments or documents of title evidencing title to investments or property of IMRF or
the Fund, or (ii) borrow funds on behalf of the Fund or IMRF or commit the Fund or
IMRF to borrow funds, unless otherwise permitted by IMRF in writing, and provided
such lending is in compliance with applicable laws.
30. Confidentiality; Use of Name. The Investment manager acknowledges that IMRF is a
public agency subject to state laws including, without limitation, (i) Illinois Freedom of
Information Act (5ILCS140) which provides generally that public agency records and
agreements are open to public inspection and copying unless exempted or subject to
some specific protection under the aforementioned act, and (ii) Illinois Open Meetings
Act (5ILCS120) (and collectively with the Illinois Freedom of Information Act
9
(5ILCS140) the “Illinois Acts”), which provides generally for open meetings for public
boards.
The Investment Manager shall not disclose information of a confidential nature acquired
in consequence of this Agreement, except for information, which is or becomes within
the public domain (other than by reason of a breach of this clause), or which the
Investment Manager may be entitled or bound to disclose by applicable law or
regulation or which is requested by regulatory or fiscal authorities or court of competent
jurisdiction.
Without the prior written consent of IMRF, the Investment Manager will not use, and
will instruct its Affiliates, and their respective agents, officers, directors, managers or
employees to not use, the name of IMRF or any of its affiliates or any derivative thereof
for any promotional purpose, whether orally or in writing, including in any sales
materials, offering documents or press releases relating to this Agreement, or to
otherwise indicate that IMRF is a client of the Investment Manager. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Investment Manager may disclose information in relation to IMRF
and/or the Fund (i) to its officers, employees, affiliates, delegates and agents, the Master
Trustee, and to any broker or counterparty (in accordance with market practice) to
transactions undertaken for the Fund, and in all cases only as necessary to assist or
enable the proper performance of its services under this Agreement or to assist or enable
the effective management of IMRF’s overall relationship with the Investment Manager
and its affiliated entities and (ii) as required by law, regulation or legal process.
To the extent derivatives are authorized to be used in the Fund, IMRF understands and
agrees that a copy of this Agreement may be provided to brokers, dealers or banks with
which derivatives transactions are executed on behalf of IMRF.
Neither the Investment Manager nor any of its officers, employees, agents nor any
delegate appointed by the Investment Manager is obliged to disclose to IMRF or to take
into consideration information the disclosure of which by it to IMRF would or might be
a breach of duty or confidence to any other person.
31. Form ADV. IMRF acknowledges receipt of Part 2 of the Investment Manager’s Form
ADV in compliance with Rule 204-3(b) under the Advisers Act. IMRF agrees that any
subsequent deliveries of the Investment Manager’s Form ADV, Part 2 or any
amendments thereto may be sent to IMRF via email delivery at the following email
address: invreports@imrf.org.
32. Maintenance, Preservation and Review of Books and Records; Errors and Violations.
The Investment Manager shall maintain all books and records in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles consistently applied. “Books and records” are
the proper and complete books of account for the Fund, together with all records,
instruments, work papers and documents relating to the Fund. All such books and
records shall be maintained at the Investment Manager’s principal place of business and
10
shall be preserved during the term of this Agreement and for six (6) years thereafter.
During such period, IMRF, and/or its authorized representatives, from time to time,
upon two (2) business days notice, shall have the right to inspect, duplicate and audit
such books and records for all purposes. If an error is discovered as a result of an audit
performed by the Investment Manager or IMRF, or if the Investment Manager becomes
aware of any error affecting the Fund or assets held in the Fund through any other
means, Manager shall notify IMRF and use its best efforts to promptly correct such error
or to cause the appropriate party to correct such error. In addition, the Investment
Manager shall report to IMRF any violation of Exhibit A, the terms of this Agreement or
any applicable law, rule or regulation, within 24 hours of such violation. Such report
shall include a description and assessment of the violation and the plan for curing such
violation and corrective action.
33. Representations of the Investment Manager. The Investment Manager hereby represents
and warrants to IMRF as follows, which representations and warranties shall be
continuously made at all times during which Investment Manager acts as investment
manager to IMRF unless Investment Manager otherwise notifies IMRF in writing:
(i) The Investment Manager is not subject to any of the disqualifications
described in Section 411 of ERISA;
(ii) Except as specifically disclosed in writing to IMRF, neither the
Investment Manager, any of its subsidiaries, divisions or other affiliates, nor any
of their officers, directors, partners, or employees, ever has been (A) convicted of
or pleaded guilty (or nolo contendere) to a felony or misdemeanor involving (1)
an investment or investment-related business, (2) fraud, false statements or
omissions, or (3) the wrongful taking of property, bribery, forgery, counterfeiting
or extortion; (B) found by a court to be in violation of any federal or state
investment (or investment-related) statutes or regulations; (C) found by the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other domestic or foreign
governmental agency or self-regulating organization, to have (1) made a false
statement or omission, (2) been involved in a violation of its regulations or
statutes, or (3) been a cause of an investment-related business having its
authorization to do business denied, suspended, revoked or restricted; or (D)
found to be in violation of Section 411 of ERISA; nor is any claim, proceeding or
litigation known to the Investment Manager that might lead to the foregoing
presently pending; and
(iii) Except as specifically disclosed in writing to IMRF, neither the
Investment Manager, any of its subsidiaries, divisions or other affiliates, nor any
of their officers, directors, partners, or employees directly involved in the
management of Fund ever has (A) had an insurance or bonding company deny,
pay out on or revoke a fidelity bond or fiduciary liability insurance policy; (B)
filed a bankruptcy or insolvency petition (or been declared bankrupt) or had a
11
trustee appointed under the Securities Investor Protection Act; or (C) had its
registration revoked or its activities restricted; nor is any claim, proceeding or
litigation that might lead to the foregoing presently pending;
34. Limited Recourse. The Investment Manager shall not enter into any agreement by or on
behalf of IMRF that: (i) is binding on IMRF or allows, either expressly or by operation
of law, recourse to IMRF, (ii) creates any actual or potential liability on the part of
IMRF that exceeds the scope of authority delegated to the Investment Manager under
this Agreement or (iii) waives any of IMRF’s rights, defenses or causes of actions. The
Investment Manager agrees that, with respect to IMRF, no document or agreement shall
be executed or entered into by the Investment Manager on behalf of IMRF if such
document or agreement would expose IMRF to liability and the recourse of the other
party to the assets of IMRF under such document or agreement is not limited to the
assets of IMRF that are managed by the Investment Manager, and further agrees to note
its files to ensure ongoing compliance with this agreement. Liabilities that are not
authorized by IMRF and are prohibited by this provision, include, without limitation,
any obligation on the part of IMRF to indemnify a third party or to pay attorneys’ fees,
legal expenses, penalties or liquidated damages. The Investment Manager shall have no
authority to represent IMRF in any manner whatsoever in any legal proceeding
(including bankruptcies) and litigation that is filed as a result of the Investment
Manager’s trading activity without the prior written consent of IMRF. IMRF reserves
all rights to retain legal counsel on its behalf and oversee any and all litigation where
IMRF may have a claim, resulting from any securities purchased on its behalf.
35. Entire Agreement. This Agreement, including its exhibits, contains all agreements of
the parties to this Agreement and supersedes any previous negotiations and agreements.
There are no understandings made between the parties other than those set forth in this
Agreement. This Agreement may not be modified except by a written instrument duly
executed by the parties to this Agreement.
36. Authority. Each of the parties to this Agreement represents that it is duly authorized and
empowered to execute, deliver and perform this Agreement and that neither such
execution and delivery nor the performance of its obligations hereunder conflict with or
violate any provision of law, rule or regulation, contract, deed of trust or any other
instrument to which it is a party or to which it or any of its property is subject and that
this Agreement constitutes a valid and binding obligation enforceable in accordance
with its terms.
37. Severability. The parties intend that each provision of this Agreement is severable. If
any provision or term in this Agreement is determined for any reason whatsoever to be
illegal or otherwise unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions and terms.
38. Governing Law. The terms and provisions of this Investment Management Agreement
shall be construed and governed in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois,
12
without giving effect to the principles of conflicts of law thereof, to the extent that such
laws are not preempted by the laws of the United States of America.
39. Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of
which shall be deemed an original, but all of which taken together shall constitute one
and the same Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Investment Manager has caused these presents to be
signed by its duly authorized officers and a duly authorized representative of IMRF has affixed
his hand, the day and year first above written.
By: _______________________________
Name:
Title:
Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
By: ______________________________
Louis W. Kosiba
Executive Director
13
Exhibit A
Nature of Investments and Description of Services
1. The nature of the investments to be made pursuant to this Agreement is as follows:
Strategy Overview
The Investment manager will invest the account in a ___________ portfolio. The
objective of the account is to outperform the _______________________________Index
by _____, net of fees, annualized, over a 5 year period.
2. The services to be performed are described as follows:
a. To recommend actions which in their best professional judgment are in the best
interests of the IMRF to meet the investment objectives. Such recommendations
include but are not limited to: (A) the allocation of funds among alternative types
of investments; (B) specific investment opportunities regarding the acquisition,
retention or disposition of investments; and (C) the addition, deletion or
modification of authorized investments.
b. In the selection of broker-dealers with whom to place orders for the purchase or
sale of securities for the Fund, the primary objective of the Investment Manager
shall be to obtain the most favorable results for the Fund. The Investment
Manager's selection of broker-dealers may take into account such relevant factors
as (1) price and/or commission; (2) the broker-dealer's facilities, reliability, and
financial responsibility; (3) the ability of the broker-dealer to effect securities
transactions, particularly with respect to such aspects as timing, order size,
execution of orders, and the ability to complete a transaction through clearance,
settlement, and delivery; and (4) the research and other services provided by such
broker-dealer to the Investment Manager which are expected to enhance general
portfolio management capabilities, notwithstanding the fact that the Fund may not
be the direct or exclusive beneficiary of such services. The Investment Manager's
selection of such broker-dealers shall be in accordance with Article I of the
Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.), the Investment Advisors Act of
1940, and any other applicable securities laws, rules, and regulations.
c. To report to IMRF monthly, in writing, on the composition and relative
14
performance of the investments in their designated portfolios; the investment
outlook for the near and long term; significant changes in the portfolio during the
month; and the reasons for any significant differences between the performance of
the portfolios and the appropriate market indices or other performance
benchmarks established by IMRF and the Investment Manager.
d. Additional responsibilities as detailed in each Investment Manager's agreement
with the Board.
Investment Guidelines
e. The expected rolling twelve-quarter tracking error should be between ____ and
____. Tracking error should be reported to IMRF on a monthly basis.
f. (Portfolio-specific guidelines will be inserted here)
3. The need for the services to be performed is described as follows:
The IMRF Board of Trustees seeks to employ a ________________ manager who
possesses superior capabilities in the management of assets for public retirement funds.
This account provides diversification benefits for IMRF’s total investment portfolio, for
which the objective is to achieve a rate of return greater than the current actuarial
assumption.
4. The plan for post-performance review shall be as follows:
Normally the Board shall not make any final decision about the retention of any
investment manager on the basis of performance for at least three years from the original
date of the engagement with the manager in the absence of any compelling
circumstances. This policy recognizes that investment strategies must be assessed over
full market cycles. The trend in investment experience over other time periods may be
judged important. Any unusual events or trends will be considered when evaluating
intermediate and short-term results.
Investment performance will be reviewed monthly. Formal portfolio reviews with
IMRF Staff will be conducted not less than twice a year. Additional meetings with
IMRF Staff, Consultant, Investment Committee and Board of Trustees may be required.
5. The qualifications necessary for the Investment Manager are as follows:
15
a. Investment Manager must be registered as an investment adviser under the Federal
Investment Advisers Act of 1940, or
b. A bank as defined under the Federal Investment Advisers Act of 1940.
c. Investment Manager must be bonded in accordance with the provisions of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
6. The method for charging and measuring cost, if applicable, is as follows:
A standard fee schedule as presented in Exhibit B.
16
Exhibit B
Investment Manager’s Compensation
Fee Schedule
(Fee schedule will be inserted here).
 Fees are calculated at the annual rate specified above and are billed to IMRF quarterly in
arrears.
 Fees are applied against the average of the month end market values during the quarter as
determined by IMRF’s Master Trustee.
 Fees for periods of less than a full quarter will be prorated based on the number of days
the assets are managed.
17
Exhibit C
Disclosure Schedule
The Investment Manager warrants and represents to IMRF as follows:
1. There are no direct and indirect fees, commissions, penalties, and other
compensation, including reimbursement for expenses, that may be paid by or on behalf of the
Investment Manager in connection with the provision of services to IMRF, except as follows:
(If none, state “none”)
2. The following is a true, accurate and complete list of the names and addresses of
(i) the Investment Manager; (ii) each entity that is a parent of, or owns a controlling interest in,
the Investment Manager; (iii) each entity that is a subsidiary of, or in which a controlling interest
is owned by, the Investment Manager, including each Sub-Adviser; (iv) all persons who have an
ownership or distributive income share in the Investment Manager that is in excess of 7.5%;
(v) each person who serves as an executive officer of the Investment Manager:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
3. The following is a true, accurate and complete list of the names and addresses of
all subcontractors and Sub-Advisers, if applicable, and the expected amount of money each will
receive under the contract, including an acknowledgment that the contractor or Sub-Adviser
must promptly make notification, in writing, if at any time during the term of the contract a
contractor or Sub-Adviser adds or changes any subcontractors or Sub-Advisers. (For purposes of
this paragraph “subcontractor” does not include non-investment related professionals or
professionals offering services that are not directly related to the investment of assets, such as
legal counsel, actuary, proxy-voting services, services used to track compliance with legal
standards, and investment fund of funds where the board has no direct contractual relationship
with the investment advisers or partnerships.)
(If none, state “none”)
4. The Investment Manager acknowledges that it is familiar with the provisions of
Sections 1-135 and 1-145 of the Code, which read in their entirety as follows:
18
Sec. 1-135. Fraud. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement or
falsifies or permits to be falsified any record of a retirement system or pension
fund created under this Code or the Illinois State Board of Investment in an
attempt to defraud the retirement system or pension fund created under this Code
or the Illinois State Board of Investment is guilty of a Class 3 felony. (40 ILCS
5/1-135)
Sec. 1-145. Contingent and placement fees prohibited. No person or entity shall
retain a person or entity to attempt to influence the outcome of an investment
decision of or the procurement of investment advice or services of a retirement
system, pension fund, or investment board of this Code for compensation,
contingent in whole or in part upon the decision or procurement. Any person who
violates this Section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not more
than $10,000. In addition, any person convicted of a violation of this Section is
prohibited for a period of 3 years from conducting such activities. (40 ILCS)
19	

Bank of Baroda
ACCOUNT OPENING FORM FOR INDIVIDUALS F. No.-401
Branch: _________________________________________________ Date: D D M M Y Y Y Y
Account No. Branch ALPHA Scheme Code
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I/We request you to open my/our deposit account with your branch/bank as under: (Tick (√) relevant type of account)
Type of Account Scheme Name Type of Account Scheme Name
 Savings Bank A/c  Term Deposit A/c
 Current A/c  Other A/c
FULL NAME, in CAPITAL Letters (In the order of first, middle and last name, leaving a space between words) M/F
1
2
3
Date of Birth (dd/mm/yyyy) PAN (if not available, please attach Form 60/61) Customer ID(if any existing)
1
2
3
Occupation * Status ** Annual Income (in Rs.) Relationship with 1st applicant Nationality Father's / Husband's Name
1
2
3
* Please choose from the following:
Salaried Self Employed Professional Politician Housewife Student Defence Staff
Retired Stock Broker Agriculture Antique Dealer Arms Dealer Business Others
** Please choose from the following (If Staff / Ex-Staff, mention E.C. Number):
Minor Sr Citizen Staff (EC No. ) Ex-Staff (EC No. ) Pensioner NRI Other /General
Relationship with minor (√ tick one)Name of the Guardian (In case of Minor):
(Attach Proof for minor’s DOB) F & NG M & NG Legal* De facto Others
* In case of legal guardian (guardian appointed by Court), enclose copy of the court order.
Name and address of Employer
First Applicant 2nd Applicant 3rd Applicant
Operating Instructions (Please mark  in appropriate box):
Self Either or Survivor Former or Survivor Jointly Any one or Survivor/s Others (Pl. Specify)
Facilities required (Please mark  in appropriate box/es):
Cheque Book Statement of Account through
Issued Cheque Series No.___________ to ___________
Date of Issue:
Pass book Post E mail Delivery at branch
Statement Frequency: Monthly Quarterly
* Internet Banking – Baroda Connect Debit cum ATM Card * BOB Card
(* Please fill up separate application for Internet Banking – Baroda Connect and/ or BOB Card).
Please issue Debit cum ATM card in the name of the first / all applicants (in case of two joint a/c holders with operations as E or S / Any one or S):
Name to appear on Debit cum ATM Card In CAPITAL LETTER (not to exceed 20 Characters)
First applicant
Second Applicant
Third Applicant
Residential address
First Applicant 2nd Applicant 3rd Applicant
Flat No./Bldg Name
Street/ Road & Area/ Locality
City and District
State and Country
Pin Code
Tel No., Fax No.
Mobile
Email
Bank of Baroda
Communication Address (If different from Residential Address)
First Applicant 2nd Applicant 3rd Applicant
Flat No./Bldg Name
Street/ Road & Area/ Locality
City and District
State and Country
Pin Code
Tel No., Fax No.
Mobile
Permanent Address / In case of NRE, local address in India
Flat No./Bldg Name
Street / Road & Area / Locality
City and District
State and Country
Pin Code
Tel No.,
OTHER INFORMATION: (√√√√ tick one)
Education :
Monthly Income (Rs.}:
Expected Annual Turnover in the A/C: Rs. _____________________
If salaried, employed with: (√√√√ tick one)
Proprietorship Public Ltd. MNC Partnership Public Sector Pvt. Ltd. Government Others (Pl. Specify)
If Professional: (√√√√ tick one)
Doctor Architect CA / CS IT Consultant Engineer Lawyer Others (pl. Specify)
If Business: (√√√√ tick one)
Manufacturing Real Estate Antique Service Provider Trader Arms Dealer Agriculture Stock Broker Others (Pl. Specify
DECLARATION (Please mark  in appropriate boxes):
[ ] I / we declare that I / we do not enjoy any credit facilities with other bank/s.
[ ] I / we declare that I / we have following deposit accounts and /or credit facilities with your / other banks branches:
Bank & Branch Place of Bank /
Branch
Type of
Account / Facility
Amount Account No.
TERMS & CONDITIONS & DECLARATION (Please mark  in appropriate boxes):
I/We have read, understood and agree to abide by the Bank’s rules relating to the conduct of the above accounts / services/ products /Fee & charges
which are displayed on the website www.bankofbaroda.com / contained in the brochures of the Bank from time to time.
[ ] I/We wish to be informed about the various features/ products and promotional offers made by the Bank from time to time.
[ ] Please do not call/ contact me/us for various features/ products and promotional offers made by the Bank from time to time.
 Please issue Multi-city / Normal cheque book and recover charges from my/our account as per norms of the bank (Give Option)
 Account will be operated and balance along with interest payable as per operational instructions given above.
 I shall represent the said minor in all future transactions of any description in the above account until the said minor attains majority.
 I will indemnify the Bank against the claim of the above minor of any withdrawal/transactions made by me in his/her account.
 I / We understand that in the event of the death of the depositor(s), premature termination of term deposit would be allowed without any penal
charges to the claimant(s) after following the due procedure.
 I / We also agree to maintain the minimum / quarterly average balance which the Bank may prescribe as the minimum / quarterly average balance
to be maintained to avail the facilities and agree to pay the charges if minimum / quarterly average balance is not maintained and any other
charges stipulated by the Bank. I/We understand that any change in this respect will be notified by the Bank on its
website www.bankofbaroda.com and also will be displayed on the notice board of the branches one month in advance.
 I / we shall fill up separate pay-in-slips prescribed by the Bank for various time deposit schemes. I / we understand that the Term deposit shall be
under auto-renewal scheme of the Bank unless otherwise specified by me/us.
 I/We authorize Bank of Baroda/its Group Companies or its/their agents to make references and enquiries as may be deemed necessary in their
discretion with regard to the information furnished in this application. Bank of Baroda and its Group entities/companies are empowered to
exchange, share or part with all the information, data or documents relating to my/our application inter se among themselves or to other Banks /
Financial Institutions / Credit Bureaus / Agencies / Statutory Bodies / such other entities / persons as may be deemed necessary or appropriate or
as may be required for processing of such information / data by such person/s or for furnishing of the processed information / data / products
thereof to other Banks / Financial Institutions / Credit Bureaus / Agencies / users registered with such agencies.
For Debit cum ATM Card to be issued in the operative deposit account:
 I/We have read and understood the terms & conditions governing the usage of the Debit Card. I/We accept to be bound by the said terms &
conditions and to any changes made therein from time to time by the Bank at its sole discretion. I/We authorize Bank of Baroda to issue a Debit
cum ATM Card to the person/s as name mentioned in the application of account opening form. I confirm that I am the sole account holder or have
the required mandate to operate the account singly linked to the Debit Card. I/We further unconditionally and irrevocably authorize you to debit
my/our account annually for Debit Card fees/charges if any stipulated by the bank.
 I/We understand and undertake that the usage of the Debit Card shall be strictly in accordance with the Exchange Control Regulations and in the
event of any failure to do so, I/We will be liable for action under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and the amendments thereof
stipulated by Reserve Bank of India from time to time.
 I/We accept full responsibility for my/our Debit Card and agree not to make any claims against Bank of Baroda in respect thereto.
Full Signature (in running handwriting):
___________________ ____________________ ____________________
(Sole / First Applicant) (2nd Applicant) (3rd Applicant)
Non Matric SSC/HSC Graduate Post Graduate
Upto 5000/- 5001 – 10000 10001 – 20000 20001 - 50000 50001 – 1 lac Above 1 lac
Bank of Baroda
Introduction from an existing account holder (at least six months old satisfactorily conducted and KYC compliant account).
Name: Account No.
Address: Date of opening of the A/C:
Customer ID:
Pin: Email: Branch Name:
Tel No. Mobile Fax Type of A/c. SB / CA / CC / OD
I/We certify that, Mr./ Mrs./ Ms. ________________________________________________________________________________ is/are known to
me/us personally since last _________ months / years and confirm the occupation and address stated in this application form for opening account are
correct to the best of my/our knowledge & belief.
Date: (Signature of the Introducer)8888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888
TITLE OF THE ACCOUNT
ACCOUNT NO
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS
BRANCH
Name Specimen Signature Photograph
Customer ID
1.
Recent Photo
Customer ID
2.
Recent Photo
Customer ID
3.
Recent Photo
Name: _______________________________________ Signature:_________________________ (S.S No: _________)
Bank Official in whose presence signed
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Form DA-1 Nomination Form
Nomination under section 45ZA to 45ZF of the Banking Regulation A/c 1949 and 2(i) of the Banking Companies (Nomination) Rules 1985 in respect of
bank deposits.
I / We __________________________________________________ name(s) and address (es) nominate the following persons to whom in the event of
my / our / minor’s death, the amount of the deposit, particulars whereof are given below may be returned by Bank of Baroda ______________ Branch.
Deposit Nominee
Nature
of
Deposit
Distinguishing
No
Additional
Details
(if any)
Name of Nominee Address of Nominee Relationship
with depositor
(if any)
Age If Nominee is
minor his/her
date of birth #
# As the nominee is a minor on this date, I / We appoint Shri / Smt / Kumari __________________________________________________ (Name
Address, and Age) to receive the amount of deposit on behalf of the nominee in the event of my / our / minors death during the minority of the nominee.
Place: ____________________
Date: ____________________ # Strike out if nominee is not a minor.
@ Signature, Name and Address of Witness *Signatures / Thumb Impression of Depositors
* Where deposit is made in the name of a minor the nomination should be signed by a person lawfully entitled to act on behalf of the minor.
@ Signature(s) of depositor(s) should be witnessed by one person, thumb impression(s) of depositor(s) should be witnessed by two person(s).
Bank of Baroda
Details of Identification documents submitted by the applicant/s.
(CARE: FOR NRI APPLICANTS COPY OF PASSPORT MUST BE SUBMITTED AS IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT)
Photo Identity
1 2 3
Address Proof Identity
1 2 3
Type of Document
Document Number
Issuing Authority
Date of Issue
Place of issue
Valid up to.
****************************************************************************************************************************************************************************
Form 60 / 61 (to be filled by those who do not have PAN)
Form 60
Are you a Tax Assessee  Yes  No if Yes
a) Details of Ward / Circle / Range where the last return of income
was filled: ________________________
b) Reason for not having PAN No: _________________________
Form 61
To be filled by a person who has only agricultural income and no
other income chargeable to income tax.
I hereby declare that my source of income is from agriculture and I
am not required to pay income tax on any other income if any.
Verification
I ____________________ do hereby declare that what is stated is
true to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Verified at ________ this the __________day of _________20
Date _____________________
Place: Signature of the Declarant.
KYC IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT TO BE SUBMITTED BY APPLICANT
(Any one document from each of the following two lists subject to Bank’s
satisfaction)
LIST – I (Latest/ recent photo identification documents)
1. Passport (Must for NRI)
2. Driving License with photograph
3. Voter’s Identity Card
4. PAN Card, Government ID Card
5. Identity Card/ Confirmation from employer
6. Letter from recognized public authority or public servant verifying the
identity (photo) of customer.
7. Confirmation letter from employer / other Bank verifying therein
photograph of the customer along with other things.
8. Any other document with photograph evidencing identity of the
applicant/s acceptable to the Bank.
(For married woman, proof of identity with her maiden name, if supported with
a verified true copy of marriage certificate is acceptable as valid identity
proof).
LIST – II (Latest / recent documents showing address proof)
1. Passport
2. Driving License with address, Voters’ Identity Card
3. Telephone Bill, Electricity Bill, Ration Card
4. Bank account statement (with address)
5. Income / Wealth Tax assessment order (with address)
6. Letter from employer / Any document of communication issued by any
authority of Central / State Government or local body showing residential
address.
7. Any documentary evidence in support of residential address acceptable
to the Bank.
8. In case of married women address proof of the groom is acceptable
=====================================================================================================
For Office Use
Sr.
No
Description Name of Authorised
Staff
Signature
1 Applicant interviewed & purpose ascertained by
2 Document/s of identification/Address Proof listed above were verified with
original by
3 Letter of thanks sent to A/c. holders and Introducer on __________
4 Money Laundering Risk Classification
[ ] Low [ ] Medium [ ] High
KYC CERTIFICATION:
I have met the account opener/s Mr./Ms. ____________________
Mr./Ms. ___________________________ Mr./Ms.____________________ in person and
hereby confirm that KYC Norms are fully complied with and further confirm that -
i) a) The introducer has visited the branch
OR
b) The introducer has not visited the branch but written confirmation obtained.
ii) The signature of the introducer is verified and his/her Account is more than six months old
and KYC Compliant.
_____________________________
Signature of Head of the Department Specimen Signature No.__________
Date:
I have verified the documents
submitted and confirm that KYC
Norms are fully complied with.
Signature of Branch Head
/ Joint Manager / Manager
Specimen Signature
No.____________
Date:
Pkv/ ACCOUNT OPENING FORM FOR INDIVIDUALS-31.01.08 msr08/ ACCOUNT OPENING FORM FOR INDIVIDUALS-31.01.08

PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
ACCOUNT OPENING FORM (All BRANCHES)
FOR RESIDENT
INDIVIDUALS (SINGLE/
JOINT) ACCOUNTS
The Manager,
Branch Office…………………………..
Dist. No…….……………………………
(FOR OFFICE USE ONLY)
Customer ID No:
(Sole/first A/c holder
only)
Account No.
(16 digits)
1. I/we request you to open the following account. I/we agree to be bound by the bank’s rules in force
from time to time. (Tick the relevant box on right side).
(To be filled in Block Letters)
(A) Savings Fund Account (B) PNB Prudent Sweep SF
(Sweep In and Out Facility Required
for………days)
(C) Current Account $
(D) PNB Smart Roamer
Current Account $
(Sweep In and Out Facility
Required for………days)
(E) Overdraft/Cash Credit $ (F) PNB Spectrum
FixedDeposit@
(G) Recurring Deposit
Monthly Instalment Rs………
No. of instalments……………
Interest rate ………….%
(H) Flexi-Recurring Deposit
Monthly Core amount Rs……………
No. of instalments ………………
Interest rate ………….%
(I) Tax Saver FD@
(Separate declaration
annexed)
(J) Flexible Rate
Deposit@
(K) OTHERS (specify):
@Amount Rs………………….……………Period: Year………..Months………...Days…….……. Interest Rate: ………..…%
On maturity Annually Half Yearly Quarterly Monthly Credit Interest to SF/CA/ CC/OD
Account No.________________
Interest payment
frequency
(Pl. tick in the
appropriate box)
Credit maturity proceeds to SF/CA/
CC/OD
Account No.__________________
TDS DETAILS TDS, if applicable: Yes/No If no, exemption reference No.______________________
If Yes, Whether Form 15 G/H* submitted : YES NO
Instruction for Auto Renewal on maturity of
deposit (Tick the relevant column)
Renew for
Principal &
Interest
Renew for
Principal only
Period for which Auto renewal required:………
No. of times…………
2. Name of sole/first account holder (in block letters)
Mr./Ms.
First Name
Middle Name
Last Name
$ I /We am/are not availing any credit facility with any other Bank(s)/branch(es) of your Bank and I/We undertake to inform
you, in writing, as soon as any credit facility is availed by me /us from any other Bank/branch of your Bank. OR I/We am/are
availing credit facilities with other bank(s)/branch(es) of your bank, as per details given in the enclosed sheet
* Form 15G for General Category & Form 15 H for Senior Citizens
PNB 1084 A
3. Names of the joint account holders (If applicable) (in block letters)
i. Mr./Ms.
First Name
Middle Name
Last Name
ii. Mr./Ms.
First Name
Middle Name
Last Name
4. Mode of operation (tick whichever is applicable )
Self Either or Survivor Former or Survivor Any one of us or
Survivor(s)
Jointly Any Other#
# Specify__________________________
5. Nomination required : YES NO If Yes, please fill form DA-1.
6. ATM/DEBIT CARD: I/we may please be issued ATM Card/ATM cum Debit Card as per following details.
I/we have read the terms and conditions governing the use of ATM/DEBIT card.
Name of Ist Card holder
Name of 2nd Card holder
Name of 3rd Card holder
7. Account numbers of the customer on which ATM-cum-Debit card services are required (in case the
customer has more than one account with Bank)
Main Account No.
2nd Account No.
3rd Account No.
8.Nomination for ATM/DEBIT CARD Holder (ACCIDENTAL INSURANCE): (delete whichever is not applicable)
i) I/We_________________________________________________ hereby nominate Mr./Ms. s/d/w/o
___________________________________r/o ____ aged___________years to receive the
money payable by the Insurance Company in the event of my/our death. I further declare that his/her receipt shall be sufficient discharge to
the bank.
(ii) As the nominee is minor on this date, I appoint Mr./Ms.__________________________________________________________________
s/d/w/o r/o ____ aged___________years to
receive the money on behalf of nominee during the minority of nominee.
9. Internet Banking : I/we may please be allowed Internet Banking as per the following details. I/we have read the terms and conditions
governing the use of Internet Banking.
i) Name of the account holder (s) authorized for using internet banking services :
a.________________________________________________________ b.__________________________________________________
ii) Account numbers on which internet banking services are required (in case the customer has more than one account with Bank)
Main Account No.
2nd Account No.
3rd Account No.
10. Request:
i) Please issue Pass Book: OR Statement of account: (at my residence/Office /e-mail address (Any one))
ii. I wish to avail Met-life insurance facility Y N
iii. I wish to avail Medi-claim insurance facility Y N
iv. I wish to avail Locker facility Y N
v. I wish to avail on-line Trading facility Y N
vi. I wish to avail cheque book facility Y N
vii. I wish to avail Credit Card facility Y N
viii. Y N
Date:………………………… Customer’s Signature/ : 1. _______________________________________
Thumb Impression
2. ___________________________________
Place:………………...………
3. ___________________________________
Cheque Book issued bearing No. From:__________________ to _______________
SIGNATURE OF AUTHORISED OFFICIAL
Photograph: Please
paste recent Passport
Size photograph.
Photograph: Please
paste recent Passport
Size photograph.
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
Branch Office…………………………..
Dist. No…….……………….……………
Customer ID
Account No.
SPECIMEN SIGNATURES/THUMB IMPRESSIONS
3. Names of the Account Holder(s) (In block letters)
i. Mr. Ms.
ii. Mr. Ms.
iii. Mr. Ms.
Mode of operation
Signature(s) verified by:
(With GBPA No. & Date)
FOR BRANCH USE ONLY
SIGNATURE
GBPA/SPA /
PF NUMBER DATE
1. Information entered in the system by
2. Entered Information Verified by
ATM-cum-Debit Card no. Date of issue Issued by (Signature with
GBPA/SPA no.)
Internet issued
(Mention User ID)
Date of issue Issued by (Signature with
GBPA/SPA no.)
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
Branch Office………………………….
Dist. No…….……………………………
FORM DA-1: NOMINATION
Nomination under Section 45 ZA of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and Rule 2(1) of the Banking Companies (Nomination) Rules 1985 in
respect of Bank Deposits,
I/ We @ Name(s) ________________________________________________________________________________________________
R/o_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Nominate the following person to whom in the event of my/our/ minor’s death, the amount of deposit in the account may be returned by Punjab
National Bank, B.O.______________
DEPOSIT NOMINEE
Nature of
Account
Account
No.
Additional
Details, if any
Name Address Relationship
with depositor,
if any
Age If nominee is minor
his/her Date of birth
* As the nominee is minor on this date, I/we appoint Mr/Ms_______________________________________________________
Age________ Address______________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________
to receive the amount of the deposit on behalf of the nominee in the event of my/our/minor’s death during the minority of the nominee.
Place:_________________________________
Date:__________________________________ @ Signature(s)/thumb impression(s) of depositors
@Where the deposit is made in the name of minor, the nomination is to be signed by natural/legal guardian of the minor to act on behalf of
the minor.
*Strike out if nominee is not a minor
WITNESSES#
Name & Signature of the first witnesses Name & Signature of second witnesses
Name___________________________
Signature:________________________
Address:_________________________
Place:___________________________
Date:____________________________
Telephone No._____________________
Name___________________________
Signature:________________________
Address:_________________________
Place:___________________________
Date:____________________________
Telephone No._____________________
#Thumb impression(s) shall be attested by two witnesses, otherwise it shall be attested by one witness.
…………….……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T
Received on ________________nomination form no. DA – 1 for making Nomination from (Name of deposit Holder(s))
___________________________ in respect of (Type of Account.) _________________ Deposit Account
No.________________ ___________________________
Date_____________________.
For Punjab National Bank
(Authorised Official)
(GBPA NO )
( ALL BRANCHES)
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
Branch Office……………………...
Dist. No…….……………………….
CUSTOMER MASTER FORM
(To be filled in separately by every individual)
(To be filled by bank)
1. Customer ID No.
(Tick the appropriate boxes, wherever required)
Photograph: Please
paste recent Passport
Size photograph.
1. Name of Account Holder (In block letters)
Mr./Ms.
First Name
Middle Name
Last Name
2. Father/Husband’s
Name
3. Gender Male Female 4. Place of
Birth
5. Date of birth
(DD/MM/YYYY) 6. Nationality
7. Religion HINDU / MUSLIM / SIKH / CHRISTIAN /
OTHERS 8. Category GENERAL/ OBC / SC / ST
9. Status Illiterate Blind Pardanashin Phy.Hand. OTHERS
10. Identification mark__________________________________________________________________
11. Address :
(a) Present Residence Owned Parental Rental Employer provided
Address
City (State) PIN
Telephone No. (with STD Code)
E-mail Mobile No.
(b)Permanent Residence Owned Parental Rental Employer provided
Address
City (State) PIN
Office / Business
Address
City (State) PIN
Telephone No. (with STD Code)
12. minor: YES NO If yes, furnish details of guardian
a. Relationship with Minor Father Mother Guardian
b. Name of Guardian: Mr./Ms.
c. Address of Guardian
13. Whether staff member: YES NO If yes, PF account no._____________
14. Occupation :
Salaried-
Govt./PSU
sector
Salaried-
others
Retired -
Govt./PSU
sector
Retired-
Others
Student Housewife Self
employed
Others
- Not
working
Medical Legal CA/CS Business-
Trading
Business-
Industry/Mfg.
Agriculture Other (specify)
PNB 1084 B
15. Marital status : Married Single
16. Educational qualification :
Up to SSC Graduate Post Graduate Other (specify)_______________
17. Total annual income (individual) ;
Up to Rs.50000 Rs. 50000 - Rs. 1.5lakh Rs.1.5 lakh - Rs 5 lakh Above Rs.5 lakh
18. Annual turnover (in case occupation is business) __________________________
Nature of business (Commodity type)________________________________________________
Whether documentary proof in support of item no. 17 & 18 provided : YES NO
If yes, type of Proof : Balance Sheet Income-tax Return
Sales Tax Return Excise Return Other (specify) _______________
19. Whether Income Tax Assessee? YES NO
IF Yes, furnish PAN/GIR NUMBER (If PAN/GIR No. is not applicable, submit Form No. 60/61)
PAN/GIR Number
20. Proof of identity :
Passport PAN Card Voter ID Card Govt. /Defence ID Card
Driving license Others (specify)_________________
21. Proof of address :
Electricity Bill Telephone Bill Passport Ration Card
Driving Licence Govt / Defence ID Card Others (Specify)__________________
22. Name of spouse (In block letters)
Mr./Ms.
First Name
Middle Name
Last Name
Telephone No. (with STD Code) PIN CODE
E-mail Mobile No.
Customer ID No. (if any) Whether employed/self employed Y N
If yes, furnish office/Business address
Office/Business
Address
Telephone No. (with STD Code)
23. Whether dealing with any other bank, if yes, please give details
Facilities/services being availedNAME OF THE BANK AND BRANCH
SF CA OD TL OTH
24. Whether already dealing with PNB, if yes, please give details
Nature of Account Account No. Branch Office
25. Loans availed: (tick whichever is applicable, if yes, mention name of financing institution/bank with amount)
Sl.No. Type of Loan YES NO NAME OF INSTITUTION AMOUNT
1. CAR LOAN
2. CONSUMER LOAN
3. HOUSING LOAN
4. MORTGAGE LOAN
5. EDUCATION LOAN
6. ANY OTHER
7.
8.
9.
26. Assets (approximate value) Rs._________________
Details(* ) :
Vehicle owned Car Two wheeler Others None
Life policy for Upto Rs 1 lac Upto Rs 2 lacs Upto Rs 5 lacs Above Rs 5 lacs
Pension policy Yes No If yes, give details______________
Medical Insurance Yes No If yes, give details______________
Other Assets :_________________________________________________________________________________
27. Investments (approximate value) Rs._________________
Details(*) & Shares/NSCs/PPF, other deposits etc) (tick appropriately)(Stocks
{
Nationalized Banks Pvt. Banks Foreign Others
Company Deposits Mutual Funds Shares Bank DepositsInvestments
Property Gold PPF Others
Amount : up to Rs 1 lac Upto Rs. 2 lac up to Rs 5 lac Above Rs 5 lac
28. INTRODUCTION: I know Mr./Ms._____________________________for the past _______years _______months as a
____________________ (e.g.) friend , relative, neighbour etc. and confirm his/ her occupation as a ____________________ and
confirm address(s) as mentioned herein.
a. Introducer’s Name_____________________________ b. Introducer’s address: ______________________________________
Phone ________________________ Signature of the Introducer:___________________________________
Introducer’s
Customer ID
No.
Introducer’s
Account No.
29( * ). Spouse’s qualification :
Up to SSC Graduate Post Graduate Others (Specify)_______________
30( * ).Details about your family members :
Age Group Up to 10 yrs 11 to 20 yrs 21 to 45 yrs 46 to 60 yrs Above 60 yrs Total
No. of Males + + + + =
No. of Females + + + + =
31(*). Any relative settled abroad? Yes No If Yes, please mention their names and addresses.
Name Address
1.
2.
3.
How many times have you been abroad in last three
years?
Never 1 to 5
times
Above
5 times
(* ) Optional
32. DECLARATION :
I have read (a) the Account Rules and hereby agree to be bound by the terms and conditions outlined in these rules which govern
the account(s) which I am opening/will open with Punjab National Bank and (b) amendments to the rules made from time to time and those
relating to various services availed by me. I understand that the bank may at its absolute discretion discontinue any of the services completely
or partially without any notice to me. I have also been made aware of the charges applicable on various services provided by the Bank. I
authorise the bank to debit my account for recovery of service charges/incidental charges as applicable from time to time. I hereby declare
that the information furnished above is true and correct to the best of my knowledge.
Date__________________
Place__________________
SIGNATURE/THUMB IMPRESSION OF CUSTOMER
33. Declaration in case of a minor account :
I hereby declare that the date of birth of the minor is ____/____/_____ who is my (relationship) __________________ and I am his/her natural
guardian/lawful guardian appointed vide court order dated_________________(copy enclosed). I shall represent the said minor in all future
transactions of any description in the above account until the said minor attains majority. I indemnify the Bank against the claim of the above
his / her account.minor for any withdrawal/transactions made by me in
DATE _____________________
PLACE _____________________
. SIGNATURE/THUMB IMPRESSION OF GUARDIAN
FOR BRANCH USE
Risk Category : High risk Medium risk Low risk Negligible risk
SIGNATURE
GBPA/SPA/
PF NUMBER DATE
1. Introducer’s signature verified by
2.Creation of customer master authorized
by
3.Account opening Authorized, copies of
documents obtained verified, Customers
name checked with the barred list and Risk
category verified by


Transaction id./
boZXoZ AmB©S>r
Note: Please use seperate deposit slip for cash deposit , local, outstation & ICICI Bank cheques.
For Cash Deposit of Rs. 10 Lacs and above, customer has to furnish source of funds separately.
*For Cash Deposits of Rs. 50,000/-, Please mention your PAN. Please update PAN in your account.
Name of Account Holder /ImVoXma H$m Zm___________________________________________
Contact no./ _____________________ Deposited in Branch:/____________________________
O_m nMuDeposit Slip /
A{YH$mar Ho$ hñVm.
Officer's sign./ Signature of
depositor/
O_mH$Vm© Ho hñVmja
Verifying officer/
gË`mnZ A{YH$mar
For office use / H$m`m©b` Cn`moJ hoVw
PAN of A/c Holder* / ImVm YmaH$ H$m n¡Z*
Bank
Others/AÝ`
Total/ Hw$b
Deno/ZmoQ> ` / ê$. Ps./ n¡.
Pieces/
g§»`m
Rs. in words/ é. eãXm| _|______________________________________
Officer's sign./A{YH$mar Ho$ hñVm._______________________________________________________
Cheque(s) subject to realisation / MoH$ àmpßV Ho$ AYrZ&
Please mention your account no. & name behind the cheque./ H¥$n`m MoH$ Ho$ nrN>o AnZo ImVm Z§. Am¡a Zm_ H$m C„oI H$a|&
Customer should pay/deposit cash at the designated counters only/Jm« hH$ H$mo H$o db {Z{Xï© > H$mCQ§ >am| na ZH$X ^Jw VmZ/ O_m H$aZm Mm{hE&
Loan Account/Credit Card No. /
bmoZ ImVm/ H«o${S>Q> H$mS©> Z§~a: Dividend/Interest/Warrants/bm^m§e/ ã`mO/ dma§Q>
Rent/Pension/Proceeds of Sale of Assets/{H$am`m/ n|eZ/ g§n{Îm
{~H«$s H$s H$m`©dmhr
Others, please specify/AÝ`, H¥$n`m {Z{X©ï> H$a|________________
Source of Funds for NRO Accounts/EZAmaAmo ImVm| Ho$ {bE μ\§$S> H$m òmoV
-------------------------------------------
SB/CA/OD/RD/CC Account No./
Eg~r/grE/AmoS>r/AmaS>r/grgr ImVm g§»`m.
Date /{XZ§mH$: D D M M Y Y Y Y
Bank / ~¢H$ Cheque no./MoH$ Z§.Branch /emIm
Rupees in words/énE eãXm| _|________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________ only/Ho$db
` / ê$. Ps./ n¡.
Cheque deposit / MoH$ O_m hoVw
g§nH©$ Z§. emIm _| O_m:
ZmoQ>: H¥$n`m ZH$X O_m, ñWmZr`, ~mhar Am¡a AmB©grAmB©grAmB© ~¢H$ MoH$ Ho$ {bE AbJ O_m nMu H$m Cn`moJ H$a|&
é. 10 bmI Am¡a Cggo A{YH$ Ho$ ZH$X O_m Ho$ {bE, J«mhH$ H$mo AbJ go YZ H$m òmoV àñVwV H$aZm hmoJm&
*ê$. 50,000/- ZH$X O_m Ho$ {bE, H¥$n`m AnZo n¡Z H$m C„oI H$a|& H¥$n`m AnZo ImVo _| n¡Z AnSo>Q> H$a|&
Name of account holder/ ImVoXma H$m Zm_
SB/CA/OD/RD/CC Account No./Eg~r/grE/AmoS>r/AmaS>r/grgr ImVm g§»`m.
Date /{XZ§mH$: D D M M Y Y Y Y
Loan Account/Credit Card No. :bmoZ ImVm/ H«o${S>Q> H$mS©> Z§~a:
ê$.`/
Total/Hw$b
Particulars / {ddaU n¡.Ps./
O_m nMuDeposit Slip /
P.T.O for third party declaration for cash deposit in a/c/ImVo _| ZH$X O_m Ho$ {bE V¥Vr` nj H$s KmofUm Ho$ {bE nr.Q>r.Amo.
Deposited in
Branch / emIm _| O_m:____________________
Bank Save time. For cash deposit use Cash
Accept or Machine (CAM) / ATM Recyclers
/ Insta Banking Facility/ g_` ~MmBE& ZμH$X O_m
H$aZo Ho$ {bE H¡$e EŠgoßQ>a _erZ (grEE_)/EQ>rE_
[agmBŠbg©/ B§ñQ>m ~¢qH$J gw{dYm H$m Cn`moJ H$a|
500x
200x
100x
50x
20x
10x
5x
Cash deposit / ZJX O_m hoVw
Miscellaneous Instructions
• Please get your Pass Book updated once in a month.
• P lease do not disclose your Account details/Internet Banking
User ID and Passwords/ATM Debit Card/Credit Card/Mobile
Banking/Personal Information to any person.
• All changes/stipulations are subject to change from time to
time. Please visit Bank’s website www.icicibank.com for
further information.
• For cash deposits exceeding Rs. 50000/- please mention
your PAN or submit signed copy of Form 60.
• The customer is obliged to ensure that the details on the
deposit slip are accurate and match with the details of the
cheque /instructions/cash.
• Do not fall prey to false promises, beware of dubious
schemes
{d{dY {ZX}e
• H¥$n`m AnZr nmg~wH$ _hrZo _| EH$ ~ma AnSo>Q> H$admE§&
• H¥$n`m {H$gr ^r ì`{º$ H$mo AnZo ImVo Ho$ {ddaU/ B§Q>aZoQ> ~¢qH$J Cn`moJH$Vm© AmB©S>r Am¡a
nmgdS©>/ EQ>rE_ So>{~Q> H$mS©>/ H«o${S>Q> H$mS©>/ _mo~mBb ~¢qH$J/ ì`{º$JV OmZH$mar H$m
Iwbmgm Z H$a|&
• g^r n[adV©Z/ pñW{V`m§ g_`-g_` na n[adV©Z Ho$ AYrZ h¢& A{YH$ OmZH$mar Ho$ {bE
H¥$n`m ~¢H$ H$s do~gmBQ> www.icicibank.com na OmE§&
• é. 50,000/- go A{YH$ ZH$X O_m Ho$ {bE H¥$n`m AnZo n¡Z H$m C„oI H$a| `m \$m°_©
60 H$s hñVmj[aV à{V O_m H$a|&
• J«mhH$ `h gw{Z{üV H$aZo Ho$ {bE ~mÜ` h¡ {H$ O_m nMu na {ddaU gQ>rH$ h¡ Am¡a MoH$/
{ZX}em|/ ZH$Xr Ho$ {ddaU Ho$ gmW _ob ImVm h¡&
• PyR>o dmXm| Ho$ ~hH$mdo _| Z AmE§, g§{X½Y `moOZmAm| go gmdYmZ ah|
Declaration for third party cash deposit in savings /current account/~MV/ Mmby ImVo _| Vrgao nj Ho$ {bE ZH$X O_m H$s KmofUm
Date/{XZm§H$:______________________________
Deposit Amount/O_m am{e: __________________________________________________
Purpose/CÔoí`:__________________________________________________________
I confirm that the cash deposit is not towards payment for job offers, claiming lottery winnings /awards /gift /inheritance. /_¢ nw{ï> H$aVm hÿ§
{H$ ZH$X O_m Om°~ àñVmd/ bm°Q>ar OrVZo H$m Xmdm/ nwañH$ma/ Cnhma/ {damgV Ho$ ^wJVmZ Ho$ {bE Zht h¡&
Signature of Depositor/O_mH$Vm© H$m hñVmja:_____________________________________________
Name of Depositor/O_mH$Vm© H$m Zm_:_________________________________________________
Contact No./g§nH©$ Z§.: _______________________________________________________
Relationship with A/c Holder/ImVm YmaH$ Ho$ gmW g§~§Y:_________________________________________
For Bank Use/~¢H$ Cn`moJ Ho$ {bE
Tran ID/Q´>m§OoŠeZ AmB©S>r… ______________________ Signature of BM/DBM/ABM/~rE_/ S>r~rE_/ E~rE_ Ho$ hñVmja: ____________________________

FORM - 3
Application for Withdrawal
To,
The Manager
IDBI Bank
____________________Branch
Toll Free Numbers: 1800-209-4324 / 1800-22-1070, Non-Toll Free Number: 022 - 67719100
Visit us: www.idbibank.in | CIN - L65190MH2004GOI148838
Sir,
I (Depositor/ Guardian) hereby apply for withdrawal from my account
as per details below:
Signature or thumb impression of depositor/ guardian
Date:
For ofce use only
Payment detail
Amount available in Account ` Date of Initial Subscription
Date on which last withdrawal was allowed
Total amount granted for withdrawal ` (In gures) (In words)
Signature of Postmaster/ ManagerStampDate
Acquittance
(to be lled by depositor)
Received ` (In gures) (in words) By cash/ cheque/
DD Bearing No. dated transfer to Account No.
Signature/ thumb impression of depositor/ guardian
Date
1. Account Number:
Amount of withdrawal applied:
*Certied, that the amount sought to be withdrawn to be availed is required for the use of who is
alive and still a Minor.
2. Please credit the amount of withdrawal to my SB Account no. standing at
(Name of Account Ofce).
Please issue a Demand Draft/ Account payee cheque.
Please pay in cash (applicable if the amount is below permissible limit of cash payment).
or
or
3. I certify that all the conditions applicable under scheme for grant of withdrawal have been complied with.
Necessary documents as applicable are attached as under:
1. 2.
Attested By
Attestation is applicable in case of thumb impression)
Name of BM/DBM/ABM/~rE_/ S>r~rE_/ E~rE_ H$m Zm_ _________________________________________________

FORM C
[See sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 9]
[Name of the Deposit Office]
Serial No.
Application for withdrawal of amount from account-A under
the Capital Gains Accounts Scheme, 1988
To
The Manager
[Name and address of the Deposit Office]
I, [Name of the * Applicant/Depositor], son of residing at
[Address of the * applicant/depositor] wish to withdraw a sum of Rs. [in figures] (Rupees
)[in words] from the account-A No. (pass book No. ) maintained
with your office, in * my name/* the name of [Name & address of the depositor]
2. I hereby declare and confirm that the amount sought to be withdrawn is proposed to be utilised in terms of the
provisions of * section 54/ * section 54B/ * section 54D/ * section 54F/ * section 54G / * section 54GB of the
Act for the following purposes.
**
(i)
3. I request you to please pay the aforesaid amount of withdrawal in the following manner:
* (i) Amount of Rs. [in figures] (Rupees ) [in words] may be paid in cash for the
purposes mentioned at Serial No. of column 2 hereinabove;
* (ii) Amount of Rs. [in figures] (Rupees ) [in words] may be paid to
[Name and address of the party to whom payment is to be made] by way of Pay Order/Demand Draft
for the purposes mentioned at Serial No. of column 2 hereinabove.
4. The application is made by me as guardian on behalf of aforesaid depositor [Name of the
depositor] who is a minor.
5. The application is made by me as authorised officer of the aforesaid depositor * firm / *
company/ association of persons/body of individuals.
6.The application is made by me as karta of the aforesaid depositor Hindu undivided family.
* Signature/Thumb impression of the Depositor/the
Guardian/Karta/Authorised Officer of the Depositor
Date :
Place : Additional specimen
FOR THE USE OF DEPOSIT OFFICE
(i) Withdrawal for total amount of Rs. * allowed/ * not allowed because the depositor has not
furnished the requisite details in respect of his preceding withdrawal/not allowed in terms of the provision of
sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 9 as the withdrawal has been sought in cash.
(ii) Amount of withdrawal has been made as per below :
(a) Cash Rs.
(b) Cheque/Demand Draft issued [Details may be noted]
Date :
Officer-in-charge
[CGNS88;C,1]
Printed From Taxmann
FORM C - Page No. 1
Notes:
1. *Delete whatever is not applicable.
2. Please mention the details of purpose for which amount is sought to be withdrawn.
3. Please mention the details of amount sought to be paid in cash and by way of Pay Order/Demand Draft
with reference to the specific purpose and serial number at which such purpose has been mentioned under
column 2 of the application and also the name of the party, account number (if any) of the party in whose
favour Demand Draft/Pay Order is sought to be issued.
4. Columns 4, 5, 6 pertain to deposits made on behalf of a minor, a company, a firm, a Hindu undivided
family, association of persons, body of individuals. Hence in case of individual deposit these columns
may be scored out and in other cases one column which is applicable may be retained and the remaining
two columns may be scored out.
5. **Details pertaining to column No. 2/3 may be furnished by way of Annexure or Annexures if the space
provided in the columns is not sufficient to furnish the details.
[CGNS88;C,1]
Printed From Taxmann
FORM C - Page No. 1
Bank guarantee format for Performance Guarantee
(To be stamped in accordance with Stamp Act
If any, of the Country of the issuing Bank)
Bank Guarantee No………….
Date……………………..
To
*Purchaser’s Name & Address+
Dear Sirs,
In consideration of the…*Purchaser’s Name+…..(Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Purchaser’ which
expression shall unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof, include its successors,
administrators and assigns) having awarded to M/s….*Contractor’s Name+……………….with its
Registered/Head Office at……………….(Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Contractor’. Which expression shall
unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof, include its successors, administrators, executors
and assigns), a Contract by issue of Purchaser’s Purchase Order No………dated……and the same having
been acknowledged by the contractor, for………..(Contract sum in figures and words+ for………*Name of
the work] and the Contractor having agreed to provide a Contract Performance Guarantee for the
faithful performance of the entire Contract equivalent to 10% (*)…………of the said basic value of the
aforesaid work under the Purchase Order.
We…………[Name & Address of the Bank+………….having its Head Office at…………….(hereinafter referred
to as the ‘Bank’, which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context of meaning thereof, include its
successors, administrators, executors and assigns) do hereby guarantee and undertake to pay the
Purchaser’s on demand any and all monies payable by the Contractor to the extent of……….(*) as
aforesaid at any time up to…….(@)………..*days/month/year+ without any demur, reservation, contest,
recourse or protest and/or without any reference to the Contractor. Any such demand made by the
Purchaser’s on the Bank shall be conclusive and binding notwithstanding any difference between the
Purchaser’s and the Contractor or any dispute pending before any Court, Tribunal, Arbitrator or any
other authority. The Bank undertakes not to revoke this guarantee during its currency without previous
consent of the Purchaser’s and further agrees that the guarantees herein contained shall continue to be
enforceable till the Purchaser discharges this guarantee or till….*days/month/year+ whichever is earlier.
The Purchaser shall have the fullest liberty, without affecting in any way the liability of the Bank under
this guarantee, from time to time to extend the time for performance of the Contract by the Contractor.
The Purchaser shall have the fullest liberty, without affecting this guarantee, to postpone from time to
time the exercise of any powers vested in them or of any right which they might have against the
Contractor, and to exercise the same at any time in any manner, and either to enforce or to forbear to
enforce any covenants, contained or implied, in the Contract between the Purchaser and the Contractor
or any other course or remedy or security available to the Purchaser. The Bank shall not be released of
its obligation under these presents by any exercise by the Purchaser of its liberty with reference to the
matters aforesaid or any of them or by reason of any other act or forbearance of other acts of omission
or commission on part of the Purchaser’s or any other indulgence shown by the Purchaser or by any
other matter or thing whatsoever which under law would, but for this provision have the effect of
relieving the Bank.
The Bank also agrees that the Purchaser at its option shall be entitled to enforce this Guarantee against
the Bank as a principal debtor, in the first instance without proceeding against the Contractor and
notwithstanding any security or other guarantee the Purchaser may have in relation to the Contractor’s
liabilities.
i) Our liability under this Bank Guarantee shall not exceed Rs……………..
ii) This Bank Guarantee shall be valid up to and including……………………..
iii) We are liable to pay the guaranteed amount or any part thereof under this Bank Guarantee only
and only if Purchaser serve upon Bank a written claim or demand on or before…..@...........
Dated this…………………Day of………….2016………………at………………….
WITNESSES:
Signature…………….. Signature…………………
Name……………………. Name……………………..
Official Address……………………… Official Address………….
Designation…………………………….
Bank’s Common Seal……….
Attorney as per Power of Attorney
Signature…………………………………
Name………………………………………
No…………………………..
Address…………………………………….

Sample Letter of Credit
(DATE OF ISSUE)
IRREVOCABLE STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT NO. (L/C NO.) FOR ( $ AMOUNT CAD.)
BENEFICIARY APPLICANT
The Receiver General for Canada
as represented by the Director,
Oil and Gas Management Directorate,
Northern Oil and Gas Branch
Department of Indian Affairs and
Northern Development
6th floor, 10 Wellington Street
Hull, Quebec
K1A OH4 AMOUNT $...........................Cad.
(amount in words)---00/100 Canadian Dollars
EXPIRY DATE
at our counters in OTTAWA, Ontario
At the request of and for the account of our customer (Applicant - Name and Address) the
“Customer”, we hereby establish in the Beneficiary’s favour our Irrevocable Standby Letter of
Credit number (L/C NO.) for a sum not exceeding in the aggregate amount of (Amount in
Words)--00/100 Canadian Dollars ($..............................Cad.).
This Credit is given in support of the Customer’s agreement with the Oil and Gas Management
Directorate, Northern Oil and Gas Branch, Northern Affairs Sector, Department of Indian Affairs
and Northern Development, and Exploration Licence No #........... (the “Licence”) and relates to
the Terms and Conditions in the Licence dated (Date of Licence), equal in the amount to the
sum of this Credit.
(In the event that the Exploration Licence has not yet been issued, then refer to the Parcel No...........
and Call for Bids name, date, and indicate that an Exploration Licence will be issued for this Parcel).
Our obligation to pay is irrevocable, absolute and unconditional and, in furtherance and support
thereof and without limiting the irrevocable, absolute and unconditional nature of our obligations
to the Beneficiary hereunder, any demand by the Beneficiary shall be honoured without any
inquiry as to the Beneficiary’s rights to make such demand, without regard to or recognition of any
contractual rights, claims or defences (legal or equitable) of the Customer against the Beneficiary
and without regard to any other defence to the Beneficiary’s demand for payment, arising as a
result of any dispute between the Beneficiary and the Customer or between the Customer and
ourselves.
Payment under this Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit shall be available to the Beneficiary on
sight against presentation by the Beneficiary to (issuing Bank, name and address) of a written
demand for payment, which demand we shall honour without inquiring whether the Beneficiary
has a right as between the Beneficiary and the Customer to make such a demand, without
recognizing any claims of the Customer and without raising any defence arising as between the
Customer and ourselves, accompanied by a certification signed by the Beneficiary or an
authorized representative that the Customer is in default under the terms of the Licence.
Partial drawings are permitted.
It is understood that the Bank is obligated under this Credit to the payment of monies only and not
the performance of the Licence.
It is a condition of this Letter of Credit that it shall be deemed to be automatically extended
without amendment, for one year from the present or any future expiration date hereof, unless
one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to any such date, we shall notify the Beneficiary in
writing at the address noted above, by Certified Mail that we elect not to consider this Letter of
Credit renewed for any such additional period. Upon receipt by you of such notice, you may draw
by means of your written demand accompanied by your above written certificate.
This Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practices for
Documentary Credits (1993 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 500.
Notwithstanding Article 17 of said Publication, if this Documentary Credit expires during an
interruption of business as described in Article 17, we agree to effect payment if this
Documentary Credit is drawn on us within fifteen (15) days after resumption of business.
Countersigned:
__________________ __________________
(Authorized Signature) (Authorized Signature)

1
DATA PRIVACY POLICY
2
Privacy Commitment:
Gayatri Co-Operative Bank limited (The Bank) recognizes the expectations of its customers with
regard to privacy, confidentiality and security of their personal information that resides with the Bank. It
is the policy of the Bank to keep the personal information of customers secure and use the same solely
for the activities related to the Bank. The Bank has adopted the privacy policy aimed at protecting the
personal information provided by/disclosed by the customers (ThePolicy). This Policy governs the way in
which the Bank collects, uses, discloses, stores, secures and disposes of personal information and
sensitive personal data or information.
1. Definitions:
“Personal information” (PI) means any information that relates to a natural person, which either
directly or indirectly, in combination with other information available or likely to be available with the
Bank, is capable of identifying such person.
“Sensitive personal data or information” (SPDI) of a person means such personal information,
which consists of information relating to:
 Password:
 Financial information such as Bank account or credit card or debit card or other payment
instrument details;
 Physical, physiological and mental health condition;
 Sexual orientation;
 Medical records &history;
 Biometric information;
 Any detail relating to the above clauses as provided to body corporate for providing service;
 Any of the information received under above clauses by body corporate for processing, stored or
processed under lawful contract otherwise.
Provided that, any information that is freely available or accessible in public domain or furnished
under any law for the time being in force shall not be regarded as sensitive personal data or information
for the purposes of this policy.
2. Personal Information :
includes but not limited to, financial information including banking and related information,
financial and credit information, ethnicity, caste, race or religion, health related details of the
individuals, sexual orientation, medical records and history, biometric information, email, address, PAN,
TAN, payment card information, photographs; provided that, any information that is freely available or
accessible in public domain or furnished under the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any other law for
the time being in force shall not be regarded as sensitive personal data or information for the purposes
of this policy.
3
PRIVACY POLICY refers to privacy commitment of the BANK Services as specified in this
document.
THIRD PARTY refers to an entity that is not the bank or its direct customer.
3. Scope:
This policy covers all users who interact with bank and those whose personal information is
collected or received or transmitted or processed or stored or dealt with or handled by bank. This policy
covers the “sensitive personal data or information” of the persons handled by bank in any form or
mode.
Please note that this Privacy Policy does not extend to third party websites linked to bank
websites, if any.
Any information that is freely available or accessible in public domain or furnished under any
other law for the time being in force shall not be financial and credit information, ethnicity, caste, race
or religion, health related details of the individuals, sexual orientation, medical records and history,
biometric information, email, address, PAN, TAN, payment card information, photographs; provided
that, any information that is freely available or accessible in public domain or furnished under the Right
to Information Act, 2005 or any other law for the time being in force shall not be regarded as sensitive
personal data or information for the purposes of this policy.
4. Applicability of the Policy
This policy is applicable to the personal information and sensitive personal data or information
collected by the Bank or its affiliates directly from the customer or through the Bank’s online portals ,
mobile apps and electronic communications as also any information collected by the Bank’s server from
the customer’s browser.
5. Introduction:
The Bank is committed to respect the privacy and use of personal information responsibility. The
bank is guided by the regulations and best practices in the area of privacy. If customer is providing
certain information with which that customer can be identified personally, then customer can be
assured that it will only be used in accordance with the privacy policy.
6. Purpose of Collection and use of personal information / sensitive Personal Data or Information:
The Bank collects the PI and SPDI from its customers and uses the same for specific business
purposes or for other related purposes designated by the Bank or for a lawful purpose to comply with
the applicable laws and regulations. The Bank shall not divulge any personal information collected from
the customer, for cross selling or any other purposes, without the written consent of the customer.
The authenticity of the personal information provided by the customer shall not be the
responsibility of the Bank.
The Bank shall not be responsible for any information that is freely available or accessible in
public domain or furnished as per law for the time being in force.
4
7. Requirement for information collection:
Bank collects and uses the financial information and other personal information from its
customers as is required under various regulations and guidelines including the KYC/E-KYC/C-KYC norms
of RBI. Such information is collected and used for specific business purposes or for other related
purposes designated by bank or for a lawful purpose to comply with the applicable laws and regulations.
8. Consent:
By providing the personal information, the persons provide consent to the bank to use personal
information for the usage of the information for the product or services requested or applied or shown
interest in and/or to enable bank for personal verification and or process applications, requests,
transactions and/or maintain records as per internal or legal or regulatory requirements and shall be
used to provide the persons with the best possible services or products as also to protect interests of the
bank.
9. Usage of information:
Bank may use Personal Information:
To allow customers to apply for products or services and evaluate customer eligibility for such
products or services:
 To verify customer identity and/or location in order to allow access to accounts, conduct online
transactions and to maintain measures aimed at preventing fraud and protecting the security of
account and personal information
 For risk control, for fraud detection and prevention, to comply with laws and regulations and to
comply with other legal process and law enforcement requirements;
 To inform customer about important information regarding the site, products or services for
which customer apply or may be interested in applying for, or in which customer are already
enrolled, changes to terms, conditions, and policies and/or other administrative information;
 For business purposes, including data analysis, audits, developing and improving products and
services, enhancing the site, identifying usage trends and determining the effectiveness of
promotional campaigns;
 To allow customer to utilize features within our sites by granting bank access to information from
customer device such as contact lists, or Geo-location when customer request certain services
 To respond to customer inquiries and fulfill customer requests;
 To deliver marketing communications that we believe may be of interest to customer, including,
ads or offers tailored to customer;
 To personalize customer experience on the site;
 To allow customer to use some site financial planning tools, information that customer enter into
one of these planning tools may be stored for future access and use. Customer will have the
option not to save the information;
5
Bank will not be held responsible for content, information usage and privacy policies of linked
site which will not be under the control of the bank. The authenticity of the personal information
provided by the customer will not be the responsibility of bank.
10. Information sharing:
 The Information shall be shared with any external organization or persons to enable bank to
provide services or to enable the completion or compilation of a transaction, credit reporting, or
the same is necessary or required pursuant to applicable norms or pursuant to the terms and
conditions applicable to such information as agreed to with bank or pursuant to any requirement
of law or regulations or any government or court or other relevant authority’s directions or
orders.
 Information may be disclosed without obtaining persons prior consent, with government
agencies mandated under the law where disclosure is necessary for compliance to legal
obligations. Any information may be required to be disclosed to any third party by bank by an
order under the law for the time being in force.
 It may be necessary to disclose the information to one or more agents and contractors of bank
and their sub-contractors, but such agents, contractors, and sub-contractors will be required to
agree to use the information obtained from bank only for specific assigned purposes and will be
disposing the information in a secured manner consistent with bank’s policies.
 The persons authorizes bank to exchange, share, part with all information related to the details
and transaction history of the covered persons to its affiliates or banks or financial institutions or
credit bureaus or agencies or participation in any telecommunication or electronic clearing
network as maybe required by law, customary practice, credit reporting, statistical analysis and
credit scoring, verification or risk management or any of the aforesaid purposes and shall
indemnify bank for use or disclosure of this information.
11. Reasonable security practices and Procedures:
TheSecurity of personal information is a priority and is protected by maintaining physical,
electronic and procedural safeguards that meet applicable laws. The Bank shall take reasonable steps
and measures to protect the security of the customer’s personal information from misuse and loss,
unauthorized access, modification or disclosure. The Bank maintains its security systems to ensure that
the personal information of the customers is appropriately protected. The Bank ensures that its
employees and affiliates respect the confidentiality of any personal information held by the Bank.
12. Information protection:
Bank customers have access to a broad range of products and services such as basic Banking
Products, ATM, Mobile Banking, AePS, EKYC etc. To deliver products and services effectively and
conveniently, it is extremely important that the bank uses technology to manage and maintain certain
customer information while ensuring that customer information is kept confidential and protected.
6
Bank is committed in ensuring that the information is secure. In order to prevent unauthorized
access or disclosure, bank has put in place reasonable physical, electronic and managerial procedures to
safeguard and secure the information that bank collects.
13. Retention and disposal:
Bank’s current policy to retain information for so long as it is needed by the business. Since most
information is in continuous use, much is retained on an indefinite basis or for such period to satisfy
legal, regulatory or accounting requirements.
When bank finds that information collected or stored or transferred is no more in use and if
there is no legal obligation to retain such information, bank will determine appropriate means to dispose
or to de-identify personally identifiable information in a secure manner in keeping with its legal
obligations.
14. Amendments/Notice of change:
The Bank may, from time to time, change this Policy. The customers are advised to visit the site
and go through the privacy policy as bank modifies the policy from time to time as, bank constantly
absorbs advanced technology and redefines processes.
15. Cookie Policy:
The Bank’s digital platforms may use various third party analytical tools. These tools may use
cookies which are downloaded to the customer’s device when the customer visits a website in order to
provide a personalized browsing experience. Cookies are used for other purposes like remembering the
customer’s preferences and settings, provide personalized browsing experience and analyze site
operations. These Cookies collect information about how users use a website. All information collected
by these third party cookies is aggregated and anonymous. By using the Bank’s website, the user agrees
that these types of cookies can be placed on his/ her device. User is free to disable/ delete these cookies
by changing his/ her device / browser settings. The bank is not responsible for cookies placed in the
device of user/s by any other website and information collected thereto.
16. DATA PRIVACY OF BENEFICIARY AADHAAR HOLDER
16.1. Introduction:
The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has been established by the Government of
India with the mandate to the Authority is to issue a unique identification number (called Aadhaar or
UID) to Indian residents that is robust enough to eliminate duplicate and fake identities, and can be
verified and authenticated using biometrics in an easy and cost-effective manner.
The UID has been envisioned as a means for residents to easily and effectively establish their
identity, to any agency, anywhere in the country, without having to repeatedly produce identity
documentation to agencies.
The UIDAI offers an authentication service that makes it possible for residents to authenticate
their identity biometrically through presentation of their fingerprints / iris authentication or non-
biometrically using a One Time Password (OTP) sent to the registered mobile phone or e-mail address.
7
16.2. Aadhaar Authentication Services:
Aadhaar Authentication is defined as the process wherein, Aadhaar number along with the
Aadhaar holder’s personal identity information is submitted to the Central Identities Data Repository
(CIDR) for matching following which the CIDR verifies the correctness thereof on the basis of the match
with the Aadhaar holder’s identity information available with it. The purpose of Authentication is to
enable Aadhaar-holders to prove identity and for service providers to confirm the resident’s identity
claim in order to supply services and give access to benefits. To protect resident’s privacy, Aadhaar
Authentication service responds only with a “Yes/No” and no Personal Identity Information (PII) is
returned as part of the response.
16.3. e-KYC Service: UIDAI also offers the e-KYC service, which enables a resident having an Aadhaar
number to share their demographic information (i.e. Name, Address, Date of Birth, Gender, Phone &
Email) and Photograph with a UIDAI partner organization (called a KYC User Agency –KUA) in an online,
secure, auditable manner with the residents consent. The consent by the resident can be given via a
Biometric authentication or One Time Password (OTP) authentication.
The Bank has entered into a formal agreement with UIDAI in order to access Aadhaar
authentication services, and e-KYC services. To protect the Aadhaar beneficiary, the data privacy policy
of the Bank is formulated as under.
16.4. Data Privacy on Aadhaar and Biometric details:-
The submission of Aadhaar details by a customer to the Bank is voluntary, and the Bank will not
insist on a customer to produce their Aadhaar details for availing any of the services. In cases where
Aadhaar number is offered voluntarily by the customer to the Bank, the Bank will seek a declaration by
the customer towards the same.
For cases where e-KYC verification is required, the Bank will get an explicit consent from the
resident for download of resident demographic details from UIDAI mentioning the purpose for which
the details are sought. The consent will be either in the form of an authorization letter or a provision to
electronically record the consent in a software application. Biometric details will also be required to be
captured by the Bank for purposes of authentication, for example to authenticate a customer before
permitting transaction through a Micro ATM / any other device, as an AEPS (Aadhaar Enabled Payment
System) transaction. The biometric details whenever captured by the Bank will be used only for data
exchange with UIDAI which validates the captured biometric data against the biometric data maintained
in CIDR (Central Identities Data Repository) against the specific Aadhaar number. The Bank will use STQC
certified devices for capturing biometric details and secured network for transmission. While the
demographic details received from UIDAI will be stored for future reference, the biometric details will
not be stored by the Bank in any manner and form. A system log wherever required will be maintained
to extract the details in case of disputes. The logs will capture Aadhaar Number, timestamp etc., but will
not capture / store the PID (Person Identity Data) associated with the transaction.
The services will be offered at select branches identified by the Bank. Aadhaar enrollment and
updation entails the process of capturing the personal information of the customers along with their
Biometric details (Finger print and iris biometrics). To protect data privacy, the enrollment application
8
sought by the Bank from the customer to assist in internal data entry process will be returned to the
resident / will be destroyed internally. The data so captured will be sent to UIDAI as a straight through
process. The Bank will not store the data captured (both biometric and personal information) in any
manner and form.
Bank shall not publish any personal identifiable data including Aadhaar in public domain/websites etc.
17. Contact Information:
The person to whom requests for access to data or correction of data or for information
regarding policies and practices and kinds of data held are to be addressed is as follows:
General Manager,
General Administration Department (GAD)
The Gayatri Co-Operative Urban Bank Ltd.,
Head Office, #7-1-72, 73, 74,
Gayatri Towers, TahasilChowrasta, Jagtial
Dist: Jagtial, Telangana State.

AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 1 of 9
AXIS Bank Internet Gateway Merchant Legal Agreement
This agreement is made on the date and at the place mentioned in Item No. 1 of the Schedule hereunder written between AXIS Bank Limited, a banking company
incorporated and registered under the companies Act 1956 and having its registered office at Trishul’, 3rd Floor, Opposite Samartheshwar Temple, Law
Garden, Ellis Bridge, Ahmedabad 380 006 (hereinafter referred to as "the Bank" which expression shall unless it be repugnant to the context or meaning thereof
be deemed to mean and include its successors and assigns) of the one part:
AND
M/s_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
having their address/ office(s) at the address mentioned in Item No. 3 of the Schedule hereunder written (hereinafter referred to as "the Merchant" which expression
shall unless it be repugnant to the context or meaning hereof be deemed to mean and include (i) in the case of the merchant being a sole proprietary concern/
individual- the heirs, administrators, executors, legal representatives and permitted assigns of the Proprietor: (ii) in the case of the ME, being a partnership firm- the
partners for the time being and from time to time of the firm, the survivor or survivors of them, their respective heirs, administrators, executors, legal representatives
and permitted assigns and (iii) in the case of the merchant being a company- its successors and assigns (as the case may be) of the other part.
WHEREAS
i) The Bank is engaged in banking business and as part of its banking operations is engaged in the business of processing payments for establishments in
respect of payments sought to be made by way of debit/ credit cards (as hereinafter provided).
ii) The Merchant undertakes the business stated in Item no. 4 of the schedule hereunder written, at the premises situated at the address (es) specified in Item no. 3
of the Schedule hereunder written.
iii) The Merchant wishes to conduct buying and selling activities from the Merchant's web site as specified in the Schedule hereto and receive credit/debit card
payments for the same over the Internet. The Bank is in the business of enabling payment through the use of credit/debit cards on the internet. The Merchant
is desirous of being able to receive payment through credit/debit cards on the internet.
iv) Enabling receipt of payment through a credit/debit card on the internet requires the use of payment gateway facilities that would enable secure transmission of
transaction messages over the Internet, and the Merchant is desirous of utilising the payment gateway facilities of the Bank.
v) The Merchant is desirous of being approved as an establishment for the purpose of payment processing of transactions made by credit/ debit cards (as
hereinafter provided) from the website specified in Item No. 5 of the schedule hereunder written, on the terms and conditions hereinafter mentioned, and in
consideration of the Bank agreeing to pay to the Merchant the amount of all sales slips (hereinafter collectively referred to as “sales slips”) issued by the
merchant in accordance with the following terms and conditions less the discount mentioned in Item no.7 of the schedule hereunder written
hereby agrees with the bank as follows: -
1. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Agreement, the terms set forth in this Article, when used in this agreement either in singular or plural forms are defined to mean unless the
context otherwise requires, the following:
 "Authorisation" shall mean the process by which the Bank confirms to the merchant whether the valid card of the card holder has the required credit limit/
funds (as the case may be) to make payments for the transaction with the merchant as more particularly described in Article 6 hereunder
 "Cardholder" shall mean a person holding a valid card, i.e. either a MasterCard/ Visa Card or an approved Card product licensed by these Associations.
 "Premises" shall mean the place/ s of business of the merchant mentioned in item no. 3 of the Schedule hereto where the equipment is agreed to be installed
by the Bank.
 "Promotional material" shall include all posters, stickers, brochures, decals, take-ones, signage, advertisements and any other material, which is used to
promote the payment processing services of the Bank offered under this agreement.
 "Settlement Amount" shall mean the transaction amount less the agreed merchant commission (referred to as MDR) and any other related charges/ fees
payable by the merchant to the Bank.
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 2 of 9
 "Business hours" shall mean the usual business hours of the merchant as specified in Item no. 6 of the Schedule hereunder written.
 "Transaction amount" shall mean the amount payable by the valid card holder on the Product/ Service offered by the merchant inclusive of shipping
charges and other taxes, duties, cost, charges and expenses in respect of the Product / Service that are to be charged to the Cardholder's Valid Credit/Debit
Card.
 "Merchant Discount Rate" means, with respect to a Transaction amount, the percentage of that Transaction Amountas specified in the Schedule and
additionally the amount per Transaction as specified in Schedule. Provided however that the Merchant Discount Rate may be revised quarterly by the Bank,
and the Bank will advise Merchant of any such change not less than 30 days in advance of its effectiveness.
 "Delivery" means, in respect of a Product, delivery of the Product by the Merchant through a reputed courier /parcel service to the Cardholder at the address
specified by the Cardholder in this behalf, or in respect of a Service, delivery/performance of the Service, proof of which has been submitted to the Bank to
the satisfaction of the Bank.
 "Dispatch" shall mean, in respect of a Product, proof to the satisfaction of the Bank that the Product has been dispatched to the address specified by the
Cardholder, and in respect of a Service, delivery/performance of the Service, proof of which has been submitted to the Bank to the satisfaction of the Bank.
 "Effective Date" means the date of execution of this Agreement by the Merchant.
 "Facility" means the payment gateway facility provided by the Bank to the Merchant in terms of this Agreement and any other services that augment or
enhance the current facility.
 "Issuing Bank" in respect of a Cardholder, means the bank which has issued the Valid Credit/Debit Card to the Cardholder with which Cardholder makes the
payment for the Products / Services.
 "Order" means an order for the purchase of Product(s) / Services placed by the Cardholder on the Merchant website.
 "Product" means a tangible product that is manufactured or distributed by the Merchant, and that is purchased by the Cardholder, the payment for which is to
be made on the Cardholder's Valid Credit/Debit Card.
 "Service" means any service that the Merchant offers to provide, and that is availed of by the Cardholder, the payment for which is to be made through the
Cardholder's Valid Credit/Debit Card.
 "Software" means a software program provided by a facility provider or its vendors to the Bank and / or to the Merchant that enables Merchant to utilise the
Facility.
 "Transaction" means every order that results in the Delivery by the Merchant to the Cardholder of the Product(s) / Services in respect of which the Order
was placed.
 "Valid Card" shall mean an unexpired card issued by any institution designated to issue a Visa, MasterCard, Visa Electron or a Maestro or other card as may
be specified by the Bank from time to time provided that the card is not listed in a current warning or restricted card bulletins or notices and bears the
signature of the person in whose name the card is personalized.
2. MASTERCARD AND VISA CARDS
This agreement and the following terms and conditions shall apply in respect of each and every transaction involving payments by means of a MasterCard or a
Visa Card ("Card") and the term "MasterCard/ Visa Card" shall be construed accordingly.
2.1 Honour MasterCard/ Visa cards: The merchant shall honour every valid, unexpired Card when properly presented for payment from Cardholders for
all transactions. The Merchant shall not engage in acceptance practices or procedures that discriminate against, or discourage the use of MasterCard/
Visa Card in favour of any other competing card brand that is also acceptable. The Merchant shall also not prefer, or indicate that they prefer a
MasterCard or Visa Card issued by a particular institution.
2.2 Displaying MasterCard/ Visa Card Symbols And Names: The merchant shall display current MasterCard/ Visa card symbols and names as well as
promotional materials to inform the public that MasterCard/ Visa Cards will be honoured at the merchant's place(s) of business.
2.3 Account Number Information: The Merchant shall not sell, purchase, provide or exchange a cardholder's name or MasterCard / Visa account number
information in any form obtained by reason of a MasterCard/ Visa Card transaction to any third party other than its MasterCard/ Visa acquiring member
(the Bank), to MasterCard/ Visa, or pursuant to a government /statutory or competent body’s request. Further, the materials containing card account
information must be made unreadable and unusable before they are discarded in an approved manner.
3. TERM; NON-EXCLUSIVE
Nothing in this Agreement shall prohibit the Bank from furnishing the services similar to those provided under this Agreement to others, including
competitors of Merchant.
4. UNDERTAKINGS OF THE ACQUIRING BANK
4.1 Provision of the Facility: The Bank agrees to enable the merchant to receive payments made to it by a Cardholder through a Valid Credit/Debit Card and
the Bank hereby reserves the right to appoint a third party to enable receipt of such payments, on such terms and conditions as it may deem fit.
4.2 Facility Standard: The Bank shall:
i) Make its reasonable best efforts to maintain the Facility in operation 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
ii) Make its reasonable best efforts to provide the Facility in a manner that protects information transmitted by the Software from (A) unauthorised
interception, (B) undetected unauthorised modification or alteration after its origination, (C) undetected initiation by persons posing as other persons
or entities, (D) unauthorised replication.
4.3 Limitations: The Bank's obligations described above are subject to the following limitations:
i) Messages that originate from the server of the Merchant or the server of a third party designated by Merchant (e.g., a host) shall be deemed to be
authorised by the Merchant, and the Bank shall not be liable for processing such messages.
ii) Messages that originate from the Cardholder are deemed to be authorised by the Cardholder and the Bank shall not be liable for processing such
messages.
iii) The Bank is not responsible for the security of data residing on the server of the Merchant, or a third party designated by the Merchant (e.g., a host)
or on the server of a Cardholder or a third party designated by a Cardholder (e.g., a host).
iv) The Bank shall have no liability for any failure or delay in performing its obligations under this Agreement if such failure or delay: (A) is caused by
the Merchant's acts or omissions; (B) results from actions taken by the Bank in a reasonable good faith effort to avoid violating a law, rule or
regulation of any governmental authority or to prevent fraud on Cardholders; or (C) is caused by circumstances beyond the Bank's control, including
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 3 of 9
but not limited to vandalism, hacking, theft, phone service disruptions, Internet disruptions, loss of data, extreme or severe weather conditions or any
other causes in the nature of "ACTS OF GOD" or force majeure.
4.4 Compliance with Law: The Bank shall at all times comply with applicable laws, rules and regulations insofar as relevant to its provision of the Facility.
5. UNDERTAKINGS OF MERCHANT
5.1 Use of the Facility: In using the Facility, the Merchant agrees:
i) Not to use the Facility in any manner, or in furtherance of any activity, which constitutes a violation of any law or regulation or which may result in fraud
on any person or which may cause the Bank to be subject to investigation, prosecution or legal action.
ii) To use information regarding a Cardholder (including name, address, e-mail address, telephone numbers, and data regarding bank accounts or financial
instruments) conveyed to Merchant by consumer software designed to access the Facility only for the purpose of completing the Transactions for which it
was furnished, and not to sell or otherwise furnish such information to others unless the Merchant has an independent source of such information or obtains
the express consent of such Cardholder.
iii) To use the Software in accordance with the terms on which the Software has been provided to the Merchant and not to attempt to modify, translate,
disassemble, decompile or reverse engineer the Software, or use it for any purpose other than for the utilisation of the Facility.
5.2 Cardholder Support: The Merchant shall provide a commercially reasonable level of cardholder support to the Cardholders with respect to sales using
the Facility. Such support shall include appropriate notice to the Cardholders of: (i) a means of contacting Merchant in the event the Cardholder has
questions regarding the nature or quality of the goods or services that Merchant offers for sale and (ii) procedures for resolving disputes. If the Bank
determines in good faith that the Merchant's failure to comply with this paragraph is causing an unacceptable burden on its cardholder support facilities, the
Bank may suspend or terminate this Agreement.
5.3 Compliance with Law & Guidelines: Merchant shall at all times comply with applicable laws, rules and regulations insofar as relevant to its use of the
Facility. Merchant will at all times comply with the guidelines set for merchants by Visa / MasterCard / Bank respectively. If the utilisation of the Facility
by the Merchant results in or may result in additional liability being placed on the Bank under VISA/MasterCard guidelines, such utilisation shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Agreement.
5.4 Prevention of Infringement: If for any reason the Facility or any component of the Facility becomes, or in the Bank's opinion is likely to become, the
subject of a claim of infringement, the Bank reserves the right to, at its option and expense, either (i) to revoke the right of the Merchant to continue using
the Facility as permitted in this Agreement, or (ii) to replace or modify Facility or the infringing component of the Facility so that it becomes non-
infringing. If, after using commercially reasonable efforts, the Bank is unable to cure the infringement, any of the Parties may terminate this Agreement on
written notice to the other Party.
6. AUTHORISATIONS
6.1 The Merchant shall not accept any Order for which payment is to be made though a Valid Credit/Debit Card unless the Transaction is authorised by the
Payment Gateway.
6.2 Unacceptable Transactions: The merchant shall not process or deposit transactions with the Bank for any other merchant establishment who may or
may not be the merchant with the Bank. The merchant will also not give cash advance by showing the transaction as a sale transaction.
The merchant shall not accept payment from a cardholder to re-finance an existing debt.
6.3 The Bank reserves the right to discontinue the service on these grounds and recover such amounts from the merchant in case it is exposed to
losses due to chargebacks or disputes.
6.4 Minimum or Maximum Transaction Amount: The merchant shall not require, or post signs indicating that they require, a transaction amount below
or above which the merchant shall refuse to honour an otherwise valid Master Card/ Visa Card.
7. TRANSACTION HANDLING
7.1 The merchant in handling transaction(s) via payment gateways must ensure that the extraction of data from the Cards must be in the manner specified by
the Bank (this may vary from time to time but the Bank will give prior notice of variation to the Merchant)
7.2 Deliver to the Cardholder a bill including mentioned of charges covered in the payment received from the cardholder through the payment gateway.
7.3 The Bank reserves the right to impose limits on the number of Transactions undertaken using a particular Valid Credit/Debit Card and the value of a
single Transaction during any time period, and reserves the right to refuse to make payments in respect of Transactions exceeding such limit.
7.4 The merchant shall not require any cardholder to pay any surcharge, to pay any part of the discount, whether through any increase in price or otherwise,
or to pay any contemporaneous finance charge in connection with the transaction in which a Mastercard/Visa Card is used.
8. PAYMENT TO THE MERCHANT
8.1 Subject to the terms of this Agreement, the Bank shall normally pay to the Merchant within two to seven business days, following the day on which the
transactions took place, the transaction amount less the discount for all the card transactions processed and accepted by the Bank for all Products /
Services sold on the Internet subject to the proof of Delivery being submitted to the Bank.
8.2 Net payments to the Merchant shall be made by the Bank to the account of the Merchant with the Bank (the "Merchant's Account") or by cheques/ pay
orders.
8.3 Payment by the Bank shall be made without prejudice to any claims or rights that the Bank may have against the merchants and shall not constitute any
admission by the Bank as to the performance by the merchant of its obligations under this Agreement and the amount payable to the merchant.
8.4 The Bank shall be entitled to set off and deduct from any payment due to the merchant:
a) The amount of any refund due to any cardholder in accordance with the refund procedure set out in clause 10 below; and
b) Any overpayment made by the Bank due to computational/ system errors or otherwise; and
c) Any other sums due from or payable by the merchant to the Bank herein; and
d) At the Bank's discretion, an amount equal to interest at the rate then currently charged to cardholders in respect of their indebtedness from the due
date until the date of payment (as well as after and before any demand made or judgement obtained) on the amount of any credit slip details of
which are not presented as required under this agreement within seven days after the refund has been agreed between the merchant and the
cardholder, or which is not dispatched to the bank within such period together with a payment in favour of the bank for the full amount thereof
(the seventh such day being the due date for the purpose of the calculation of such interest); and in doing so the Bank may-
i). Debit the merchant's account forthwith; and/or
ii). Deduct the outstanding amount from subsequent credits to the Merchant's account; and/ or
iii). If there is no account with the Bank, or insufficient funds available therein, claim from the merchant the amount credited to the
account in respect of the relative transaction/s.
8.5 If the Bank suspects, on reasonable ground and in its sole and exclusive opinion, that the merchant has been negligent, or has committed a breach of this
agreement or act/s of dishonesty or fraud against the Bank or any Cardholder, the Bank shall be entitled to suspend all payments under this agreement to
the merchant pending enquiries by the Bank and resolution of the same to the Bank's satisfaction.
8.6 Rejection of Payment: Notwithstanding anything stated elsewhere in this agreement or the annexed schedule/s, the Bank may reject payment in respect
of Orders where:
i) The authorisation process cannot be completed/fails in relation to a Transaction;
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 4 of 9
ii) Any Order which the Cardholder refuses to pay because the Product / Service was not as promised or was defective or was not delivered;
iii) Payment in respect of the Order or the relevant instalment of the purchase price has already been made;
iv) The Order was placed more than 13 calendar days prior to the date of claim by Merchant in respect thereof.
v) If the Merchant is unable to Deliver any part of the Cardholder 's Order within 13 calendar days from the date on which the Order was placed, the
Merchant shall cancel the Order and the Cardholder shall be refunded.
8.7 Consequences upon rejection of payment: Where the Bank is entitled to reject payments in respect of an Order or demand a refund, it may:
i) deduct the relevant amount from the Transaction Amount and/or payments to be made in respect of subsequent Transaction amounts until the Bank
has been refunded in full;
ii) demand payment of the relevant amount from the Merchant.
9. ORDER FORMS
The order forms in which the Merchant accepts Orders from the Cardholder on the Internet should contain the following information:
(a) the Cardholder's name
(b) the transaction amount (in Indian Rupees)
(c) the transaction date
(d) the Cardholder's postal address
(e) the method of delivery
(f) the refund policy
10. PRESENTMENT OF TRANSACTIONS AND REFUNDS
The merchant agrees to inform the cardholder about its credit refund policy clearly mentioning the same in bill invoice and/ or on the website.
10.1 a) If in respect of any transaction any goods/ services are not received as described, by the Cardholder or are lawfully rejected or accepted for or services
are not performed or partly performed or cancelled or price is lawfully disputed by the Cardholder or price adjustment is allowed, the Merchant
shall not make a cash refund but shall complete a credit slip supplied or approved by the Bank. The merchant shall sign and date each credit slip
and include a brief description of the items concerned. A true and completed copy of the credit slip must be delivered or forwarded to the
Cardholder.
b) In the event of a refund to a cardholder the merchant shall not make a cash refund to the cardholder. The merchant must present a credit process/
refund letter on headed stationary and signed by authorized signatory/ies. The merchant must not process a refund transaction, unless there is a
preceding corresponding debit on a card account
In the event that only credit slips are presented to the Bank at any one time, the merchant shall at the same time make payment of the net refund (i
e. The total refund(s) to the cardholder(s) less the discount) to the bank.
c) In situations where sale date and refund date have a gap between them, which or otherwise causes a currency translation difference for transactions
on foreign cards, the Bank will have the right to recover the equivalent INR amount pertaining to such foreign exchange currency translation
differences from the ME, for the purpose of crediting the same to the Cardholder's Card Account.
10.2 By presentation of any transaction information (which for the purposes of this agreement means any sales slip and/ or any information in respect of any
transaction presented to the Bank by or on behalf of the merchant) the merchant warrants to and agrees with the Bank:-
(a) That all statements of fact contained therein, which are within the knowledge of the merchant, are true and complete.
(b) That the merchant has supplied or caused to be supplied, the goods/ and or services to which the transaction information relates and to the value
stated therein and a price not greater or otherwise on terms not less favourable than the same price and terms at and on which such goods and/ or
services are supplied by the merchant for cash.
(c) That no other sales slip or information has been or will be issued or presented in respect of the goods and/ or services to which the transaction
information relates;
(d) That the provision of credit for the supply of the goods and/ or services to which the transaction information relates is not unlawful; and
(e) That the transaction information relates to a transaction and that the merchant has complied with this agreement.
10.3 Neither the receipt by the Bank of any transaction information nor any payment by or other act of omission by the Bank (other than an express written
acknowledgement or waiver thereof by the bank) shall constitute or be deemed to constitute any acknowledgement or waiver of compliance by the
merchant with any of the warranties specified in clause 10.2 above or any other provision of this agreement.
11. MERCHANT DISCOUNT RATE (MDR)
In consideration of the services provided by the Bank, the Merchant agrees to pay to the Bank the Merchant Discount Rate and further charges as detailed in
the Schedule, which shall be deducted by the Bank from the amounts payable to the Merchant in terms of Section 5 hereof in respect of a Transaction Amount.
The Bank shall advise the Merchant Discount Rate from time to time. For the purpose of this agreement the discount rate would be as mentioned in Item No. 7
of the Schedule hereunder written.
11.1 For the purpose of calculating the merchant discount rate on, the amount would be the aggregate amount of the bill including taxes, tips, shipping
charges, etc.
11.2 If any extra credit is given by the merchant to the cardholder without prior approval of the Bank, the merchant shall do so at its own risk and
responsibility. In such case the entire transaction would be treated as void and the Bank will reject payment of the same.
11.3 All applicable tax including service tax, consumption tax or value added tax whether currently in force or introduced after the date of this Agreement
and any other taxes, duties, fees and charges arising out of the performance of this Agreement shall be borne by the Merchant.
12. CHARGEBACKS & DISPUTES
The bank shall be entitled at any time to refuse total or partial payment to the merchant, or, if payment has been made, to debit the merchant's account with
such amount or to seek immediate reimbursement from the merchant, not withstanding any authorization and/ or authorization code numbers given by the
Bank to the merchant, in any of the following situations:-
(a) The transaction is for any reason unlawful or a fradulent transaction;
(b) Cardholder's account number is found to be omitted, incomplete or invalid, or cardholder's account number is modified or altered.
(c) The card presented to the merchant in respect of the transaction had been altered or had not yet become valid or had expired at the time of the
transaction.
(d) The card presented to the merchant in respect of the transaction was listed in a warning list or any other communication or advice (in whatever form)
from time to time, issued or made available to the Bank by other Institutions or Card Associations or if such intimation is made available by or on
behalf of the Bank to the merchant.
(e) The price charged to the cardholder was in excess of the price at which the goods supplied or services performed were supplied by the merchant for
cash.
(f) The goods and/ or services covered by the transaction are rejected or returned or the transaction or part thereof, is validly cancelled or terminated by a
card holder or if the merchant fails to provide at all or to the cardholder's satisfaction, goods and/ or services to the cardholder
(g) The cardholder disputes the nature, quality or quantity of the goods and/ or services covered by the transaction;and or the transaction itself.
(h) Any information presented electronically to the bank in respect of the transaction is not received in accordance with the bank's requirements from time
to time.
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 5 of 9
(i) The bank has requested evidence in accordance with Clause 15 hereunder, in relation to the transaction, which the merchant has failed to provide;
(j) There has been any departure from the terms of this agreement in relation to that transaction;
(k) The transaction information required to be presented in respect of the transaction is not presented to the bank within seven days of the transaction
(l) The cardholder disputes or denies the transaction or the sale or delivery of goods and/ or services covered by the transaction within reasons;
(m) In seeking authorization for a transaction, the merchant has given an incorrect cardholder's name or Card account numbers to the bank.
(n) There has been a breach by the merchant of this agreement, other than the breaches more specifically provided in this sub-clause, in connection with the
transaction or otherwise;
(o) The Bank reasonably believes that the transactions are irregular
(p) The Bank is of the opinion that there are suspicious circumstances surrounding the transaction;
(q) The Bank is of the opinion that the submission is out of the normal pattern;
(r) The issuing bank refuses to honour the transaction presented by the merchant;
(s) Any other event or circumstance which the bank shall from time to time notify to the Merchant to have occurred at the date of the transaction;
(t) If MasterCard / Visa dispute the transaction or report a retrieval request/fraud/chargeback..
13. PUBLICITY
13.1The merchant irrevocably authorizes the bank to include the merchant's name in any directory or promotional material produced in connection with the
acceptance of Master Card/ Visa Card.
13.2The merchant hereby agrees, undertakes and covenants to prominently display and maintain the Bank's promotional material as supplied by the Bank from
time to time.
14. BREACH OF AGREEMENT
Without prejudice to the bank's right to terminate this agreement under Clause 20, in the event of a breach by the merchant of any of these terms, the bank is
authorized to debit the Merchant's Account or deduct from the deposit any refund claimed. In the event that there is no account with the Bank or there is
insufficient funds available therein to claim from the merchant or that the deposit is inadequate to compensate the bank for any refund claimed, the merchant
undertakes that it would forth with becomes “Debt” and on demand by or on behalf of the bank pay to the bank the amount of the refund to the extent to which
such funds or deposit proves inadequate.
15. EVIDENCE AND DOCUMENTS
15.1 The Merchant will promptly on the Bank's request (and whether or not the same is disputed by the Cardholder) produce to the Bank evidence satisfactory
to the Bank of the Cardholder's authority for the Cardholder's Card account to be debited with any transaction amount and (but without prejudice to
the foregoing) will retain all documents and records relating to each transaction for a period of not less than one year thereafter and produce the same
to the Bank on request.
15.2 The Merchant agrees that when goods are to be exported, the following documents would be additionally maintained for records:
- Order form
- Invoice
- Certificate of insurance
- Proof of despatch of the goods
- Proof of delivery of goods
15.3 The Merchant shall provide such reasonable assistance for the prevention and detection of fraud in respect of any transaction/s as the Bank may from
time to time request.
16. REMOVAL AND CESSATION OF BUSINESS
The Merchant shall inform the Bank any removal of shops or offices, change of address and/or its cessation of business in writing 30 working days prior to its
effective date.
17. DISCLOSURE
The Bank will be entitled at any time to disclose any and all information concerning the Merchant within the knowledge and possession of the Bank to any
party in connection with the credit/debit card facility provided by the Bank, including inter alia information relating to the cause for termination of this
Agreement. This clause will survive the termination of this Agreement.
The Bank reserves the right to verify the information provided by the Merchant at the time of signing this agreement through its own staff or third party. The
Bank may thereafter seek to verify any market information that it may receive about the ME's business activities/ principals behind the business.
18. INDEMNITY
18.1 The Merchant shall indemnify the Bank for any claims, demands, actions, suits, proceedings, liabilities, losses, costs, legal fees or damages of any kind,
including attorney's fees and costs of litigation, arising from claims of a third party (including claims, assertions and investigations of a governmental
agency), which claims arise in whole or part from, and/ or asserted against the Bank on account of:
(a) any acts or commissions by the Merchant in connection with the sale of Products/ Services (by the Merchant) and the performance of this
Agreement.
(b) the negligence or wilful misconduct of Merchant or its employees or agents;
(c) a breach of an obligation of Merchant to the Bank under this Agreement;
or
(d) any loss or liability arising to the Bank from the Merchant's use of the Facility.
18.2 The Bank will be entitled to have full conduct of all proceedings and negotiations relating to any such claim and in its discretion to accept, dispute,
compromise or otherwise deal with the same and shall be under no liability in respect thereof to the Merchant and the Merchant will provide any
assistance in connection with any such claim that the Bank may require.
Notwithstanding whatever is mentioned herein the merchant agrees that pursuant to any disputes or claim if the Bank is made to refund the amount being the
transaction effected by the merchant and the purchaser, the bank shall have the authority to debit and or claim the said amount from the merchant pending any
disputes. In such an event the merchant shall pay the amount without demur.
19. CONFIDENTIALITY
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 6 of 9
19.1The Merchant will not without the prior written consent of the Cardholder, use or disclose information on the Cardholder or his/ her transactions
howsoever obtained and in whatsoever form the information shall take, to any third party (other than the Merchant's agents for the sole purpose of
assisting the Merchant to complete or enforce the transactions and the Merchant's insurers and professional advisers) unless such disclosure is
compelled by law.
19.2 The Merchant will not, without the prior written consent of the Bank, use or disclose information howsoever obtained and in whatever form about the
business of the Bank or the system of this Agreement, to any third party (other than to the Merchant's agents for the sole purpose of assisting the
Merchant to complete or enforce the transactions and the Merchant's insurers and professional advisors) unless such disclosure is compelled by law.
20. TERMINATION
20.1This Agreement may be terminated by the Merchant giving to the Bank at least thirty days prior notice in writing or by the Bank forthwith without
prejudice to due completion and payment in respect of all transactions processed and accepted by the Bank on or before the termination date. In the
event of termination the Merchant shall present all completed transactions to the Bank's representative at the time of termination. However subject to
clauses 8.4, 10.1 and 12 payment for all such items received will only be made to the Merchant after the payment is successfully collected by the Bank
from the card issuer (s) within 180 days from the date of transaction. Where any refund claimed by the Bank exceeds the amount due to the Merchant
the difference thereof shall be a debt due from the Merchant to the Bank and be forthwith recoverable by appropriate legal action, as deemed fit by the
Bank.
20.2In case of inactivity of the merchant exceeding three months, the Bank has the discretion to unilaterally terminate the agreement with immediate effect,
and the merchant shall not have any recourse to the Bank and no compensation is payable to the ME, the Bank’s decision being final and binding on
the merchant in this regard
20.3Upon termination, the Merchant shall forthwith, and at the Merchant's expenses, return to the Bank the Equipment and all related documentation.
20.4Any termination shall not affect any liabilities incurred prior to the termination nor any provision expressed to survive or to be effective on termination
and (but without prejudice to the foregoing) clauses 8.4, 10.1, 12, 15, 18 and 19 and this clause shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding
termination.
20.5Any transaction presented to the Bank after the termination date, whether it bears authorisation or not, shall not be paid by the Bank.
21. ASSIGNMENT
This Agreement is not assignable but in case of the Merchant being an individual or individuals shall bind his or their respective estates. The Bank is entitled
at any time to assign this Agreement or any of the Bank's rights and obligations herewith in favour of any subsidiary or associated company of the Bank or of
the Bank's holding company or any other Bank or other company and to sub-contract or appoint any agent or agents to carry out any of the Bank's obligations
herein.
22. REPRESENTATIONS
The Merchant acknowledges and agrees that the Merchant has not entered into this Agreement in reliance on any representation statement or warranty (whether
written or oral and whether express or implied) made by or on behalf of the Bank other than such as are expressly set out herein.
23. WAIVER
The failure by the Bank to enforce at any time or for any period any one or more of the terms or conditions of this Agreement shall not be a waiver of them or
of right at any time subsequently to enforce all terms and conditions of this Agreement.
24. ACCEPTANCE OF CHARGES WITH RECOURSE
The Merchant agrees that payment made in respect of which the Issuing Bank raises a claim on the Bank shall be the financial responsibility of the Merchant.
The Merchant agrees to the non-payment in respect of such Order or the charging back of such uncollectable charge as the case may be without any demur or
protest. The Merchant hereby authorises the Bank to debit the Merchant's bank account to the extent of the aforesaid uncollectable amounts and any other
moneys due for any reason to the Bank by the Merchant, or deduct the same from amounts payable to the Merchant in terms of Section 5 of this Agreement in
respect of a Transaction Amount.
25. DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY
The Bank disclaims all warranties, express or implied, written or oral, including but not limited to warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular
purpose. The Merchant acknowledges that the Facility may not be uninterrupted or error free.
26. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
AXIS Bank and its vendors (and any officers, directors, employees and agents of the Parties and their vendors) shall be liable only for direct, out-of-pocket
damages, and shall not be liable for any consequential, incidental or indirect damages under any theory or cause of action whether in tort, contract or
otherwise, regardless of whether AXIS Bank has been advised of the possibility of such damages provided further that the liability of the Bank hereunder shall
always be limited to Rupees Fifty thousand only, and any person including the Merchant shall not be entitled to recover moneys in excess of such limit. In
no cases shall the Merchant be entitled to punitive or exemplary damages.
27. PRICES
Prices to be charged by the Merchant shall be inclusive of all taxes and delivery charges and shall be uniform for all Cardholders. In case of any difference in
prices due to shipping or any other charges, the same shall be made explicit to the cardholder.
28. INSPECTION OF PLACE OF BUSINESS
The Merchant shall permit the authorised representatives of the Bank to carry out physical inspections of the place(s) of business of the Merchant and any
godowns and warehousing facilities of the Merchant.
29. TRADEMARKS
(a) Bank's Trademarks: The Bank hereby grants to the Merchant a non-exclusive, royalty-free limited license to use, display and reproduce the trademarks,
service marks, and logos of the Bank (herein, "Bank Trademarks") solely in connection with Merchant's offering the Facility to the public, provided
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 7 of 9
that nothing herein constitutes a license to use a Bank Trademark as part of an Internet domain name. Merchant shall use the Bank Trademarks in
accordance with the policies notified by the Bank in this behalf from time to time.
(b) Merchant's Trademarks: Merchant hereby grants the Bank a non-exclusive, royalty-free limited license to use, display and reproduce the trademarks,
service marks, and logos of Merchant (herein, "Merchant Trademarks") solely in connection with the Bank's marketing of the Facility. The Bank shall
use the Merchant Trademarks in accordance with policies as provided by Merchant from time to time.
30. MERCHANT DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
As security for the obligations of the Merchant arising in terms of this Agreement, the Merchant shall maintain an amount as specified in the Schedule, in the
form of fixed deposits with the Bank (hereinafter referred to as "the Merchant Fixed Deposit" or the "MFD"). The Bank shall have an exclusive lien over the
MFD and shall be entitled to appropriate all amounts due to it from the Merchant, including amounts in respect of refunds, charge backs and indemnities from
the MFD. In the event of termination of this Agreement by reason of breach of its terms by the Merchant, the Bank shall be entitled to forfeit the MFD. In the
event of termination of this Agreement by reason other than breach by the Merchant, the Bank shall be entitled to withhold refund of the MFD for a period of
180 days from the date of termination. During this period, it shall be entitled to appropriate any amounts due and payable to it from the Merchant in terms of
this Agreement. The provisions of this Section shall not be affected by the intervening bankruptcy / insolvency of the Merchant. The acquiring bank may
increase the MFD if there is a reasonable increase in business volume of the merchant.
31. MINIMUM ENCRYPTION STANDARDS AND SECURITY OF CARDHOLDER DATA
The Merchant must use encryption standards of 128 bits or more in respect of all processing of Order or such other standard as may be specified by Bank.
32. GENERAL
32.1 If signed by a firm, the expression" the Merchant" shall include the person or persons from time to time carrying on the business of such firm and, if,
there are two or more signatories hereto, the expression " the Merchant" shall include all and each of them and their liabilities under this Agreement shall
be joint and several. The person authorized to sign this agreement has got power and authority from the concerned authority and make them liable as per
the governing laws.
32.2 This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of India and the parties hereto submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Mumbai courts.
32.3 If any provision of this Agreement is, or proves to be or becomes illegal, invalid, or unenforceable, in whole or in part, under any enactment or rule of
law, such provision or part shall to that extent be deemed deleted from this Agreement and the legality, validity and enforceability of the remaining
provisions of this Agreement shall not be in any way affected thereby.
32.4 This Agreement shall be deemed to have been made when it is signed both on behalf of the Bank and on behalf of the Merchant.
32.5 Any notice or communication by either party to the other shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given if either delivered personally or
by prepaid registered post addressed to the other party at the appropriate address stated above or at other such address as such party hereto hereafter
specify to the other party.
32.6 In this Agreement if the context permits or requires words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders, and words in
the singular number shall include the plural number and vice versa.
32.7 All costs (including costs between the Advocate and client), charges, expenses, taxes, duties (including stamp duty) in relation to this agreement and any
document executed pursuant thereto and in relation to the enforcement of this agreement shall be borne and paid by the merchant alone.
32.8 Entire Agreement: This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between Merchant and the Bank pertaining to the subject matter hereof and
supersedes in their entirety all written or oral agreements between the Parties.
32.9 Relationship Between Parties: The Parties to this Agreement are independent contractors and nothing in this Agreement shall make them joint ventures,
partners, employees, agents or other representatives of the other Party hereto. Neither Party shall make any representation that suggests otherwise.
32.10 Survival Of Provisions: Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary herein, terms which by their nature survive termination or expiration of this
Agreement shall bind the parties following any expiration or termination of this Agreement.
32.11 Liability Upon Expiration: Neither Party shall be obligated to extend or renew this Agreement.
32.12 Headings and sub - headings: The headings and sub headings in this Agreement are for convenience only and do not affect the meaning of the relative
section / clause.
32.13 Notices: Any notice, direction or instruction given under this Agreement shall be in writing and delivered by hand, post, cable or facsimile as specified
in the Schedule. Notice and instructions will be deemed served 7 days after posting or upon receipt in the case of hand delivery, cable or facsimile.
33. VARIATION OF AGREEMENT
The Bank reserves the right at all times to vary or amend these terms and conditions or to introduce new terms and conditions. Any such variation or
amendment or introduction will become effective and binding on the Merchant upon notification to the Merchant by ordinary post and if the Merchant is
unwilling to accept any such variation or amendment or introduction the Merchant shall notify the Bank in writing by registered post within five days from the
receipt of the notification by the Bank. A notice sent by the bank by post shall be deemed to have been received by the merchant on the day following the date
of posting.
It is agreed by and between the parties hereto that this agreement shall remain in force for a period of 12 months unless terminated by either party by giving one
month's notice in writing to the other. In the event of the agreement being in subsistence at the end of the period of 12 months, this agreement shall automatically
stand renewed thereafter until terminated by either party by giving to the other party at least 1 month written notice about the same.
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 8 of 9
34. BANNED PRODUCTS & SERVICES
The Merchant hereby expressly agrees not to directly or indirectly deal in the following product/s or service/s at any time during the tenure of this Agreement.
Without prejudice whatsoever to the Bank’s other rights & privileges, the Merchant binds himself unequivocally to be solely liable for including but not limited to
any legal actions and suits, and to make good to the Bank immediately upon demand damages suffered by the Bank directly or owing to claims by any third party,
levy of assessment fees or fines, penal actions taken by MasterCard/Visa , the Reserve Bank of India and any other statutory or competent authorities for any breach
of any terms of this Agreement, including the dealing in the following :
1) Adult goods and services which includes pornography and other sexually suggestive materials (including literature, imagery and other media); escort or
prostitution services. Apparatus such as personal massagers/vibrators and sex toys and enhancements.
2) Alcohol , which includes Alcohol or alcoholic beverages such as beer, liquor, wine, or champagne
3) Body parts , which includes organs or other body parts – live , cultured/preserved or from cadaver.
4) Bulk marketing tools which includes email lists, software, or other products enabling unsolicited email messages (spam)
5) Cable TV descramblers and black boxes which includes devices intended to obtain cable and satellite signals for free
6) Child pornography in any form.
7) Copyright unlocking devices which includes Mod chips or other devices designed to circumvent copyright protection
8) Copyrighted media, which includes unauthorized copies of books, music, movies, and other licensed or protected materials
9) Copyrighted software which includes unauthorized copies of software, video games and other licensed or protected materials, including OEM or bundled software
10) Counterfeit and unauthorized goods which includes replicas or imitations of designer goods; items without a celebrity endorsement that would normally require
such an association; fake autographs, counterfeit stamps, and other potentially unauthorized goods
11) Drugs and drug paraphernalia which includes illegal drugs and drug accessories, including herbal drugs including but not limited to salvia and magic mushrooms
12) Drug test circumvention aids which includes drug cleansing shakes, urine test additives, and related items
13) Endangered species, which includes plants, animals or other organisms (including product derivatives) in danger of extinction
14) Gaming/gambling which includes lottery tickets, sports bets, memberships/ enrollment in online gambling sites, and related content
15) Government IDs or documents which includes fake IDs, passports, diplomas, and noble titles
16) Hacking and cracking materials which includes manuals, how-to guides, information, or equipment enabling illegal access to software, servers, websites, or
other protected property
17) Illegal goods which includes materials, products, or information promoting illegal goods or enabling illegal acts
18) Miracle cures which includes unsubstantiated cures, remedies or other items marketed as quick health fixes
19) Offensive goods which includes literature, products or other materials that: a) Defame or slander any person or groups of people based on race, ethnicity,
national origin, religion, sex, or other factors b) Encourage or incite violent acts c) Promote intolerance or hatred.
20) Offensive goods, crime which includes crime scene photos or items, such as personal belongings, associated with criminals
21) Prescription drugs or herbal drugs or any kind of online pharmacies which includes drugs or other products requiring a prescription by a recognized and licensed
medical practitioner in India or anywhere else.
22) Pyrotechnic devices and hazardous materials which includes fireworks and related goods; toxic, flammable, and radioactive materials and substances
23) Regulated goods which includes air bags; batteries containing mercury; Freon or similar substances/refrigerants; chemical/industrial solvents; government
uniforms; car titles; license plates; police badges and law enforcement equipment; lock-picking devices; pesticides; postage meters; recalled items; slot machines;
surveillance equipment; goods regulated by government or other agency specifications
24) Securities, which includes stocks, bonds, mutual funds or related financial products or investments.
25) Tobacco and cigarettes which includes cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, and related products
26) Traffic devices, which includes radar detectors/ jammers, license plate covers, traffic signal changers, and related products
27) Weapons, which includes firearms, ammunition, knives, brass knuckles, gun parts, and other armaments
28) Wholesale currency, which includes discounted currencies or currency, exchanges
29) Live animals or hides/skins/teeth, nails and other parts etc of animals.
30) Multi Level Marketing schemes or Pyramid / Matrix sites or websites using a matrix scheme approach
31) Any intangible goods or services or aggregation/consolidation business.
32) Work-at-home information
33) Drop-shipped merchandise
34) Web-based telephony/ SMS/Text/Facsimile services or Calling Cards. Bandwidth or Data transfer/ allied services. Voice process /knowledge process services.
34) Any product or service, which is not in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations whether federal, state, both local and international including the laws
of India.
AXIS Bank IPG Merchant Agreement V 1.1 Page 9 of 9
SCHEDULE
1. Date and Place of the Agreement : ___________________________________________________________________________________________________
2. Name of Merchant Establishment : ___________________________________________________________________________________________________
• A Company registered under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, and having its Registered Office as below
• A Partnership Firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 and having its Principal place of Business as below
• A sole proprietorship having its Principal place of Business as below
• A HUF represented through ______________ its Karta and residing as below
aged _______ years approximately
• Trust
3. Address of Merchant Establishment : _________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
4. Business of Merchant Establishment: _________________________________________________________________________________________________
5. Website address (URL)______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
6. Business Hours: ___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
7. Merchant Establishment servicing Fees-
1. Website Integration fees / Installation Charges - One time non-refundable (Rs.)
2.
Merchant Discount Rate:
% Per transaction
3.
Transaction cost (Rs.) ___________/ trxn
4. Monthly Gateway Maintenance Charges
5. Merchant Fixed Deposit (MFD) (Rs.) (Please refer to instruction in Clause 30 of this Agreement)
6.
Settlement Net Amount for transactions will be released on proof of delivery, and after number of
business days quoted in the opposite box
(Please refer to Clause 8.1 of this Agreement) 2-7 business days
7. Fraud liability of the Merchant 100%
8 . Mode of payment to the Merchant: Cheque Credit to Merchant Establishment's AXIS Bank Account No._____________________________
IN WIITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have executed this Agreement the day and year below written.
SIGNED BY SIGNED BY
(Name)_______________________________________ (Name) ____________________________________
For and on behalf of the AXIS Bank Ltd. For and on behalf of the Merchant
In the presence of In the presence of
_____________________________________________ ___________________________________________
DATE_______________________________________ DATE_______________________________________
This Agreement consists of 9 pages, including this page. All the pages should be initialed by the Bank & the Merchant, except the last page, which should be
fully signed, witnessed and Company Seal affixed. Non-Judicial Stamp/ Franking of Value INR 300 should be used to execute the Agreement.

MERCHANT SERVICE AGREEMENT
Standard Template for Merchant Service Agreement_2C2PSingapore_OCT 2020_V.2 Page 1 of 5
MERCHANT INFORMATION Date ………….……..……….……
Registered Name: ................................................................ Business Type: ...........................................................
Merchant Domain Name: .................................................... Programming Language/ Platform: …...............….…
Business Registration No: ................................................... Paid Up Capital: .........................................................
Registered Business Address: ..............................................................................................……….…..……...…….
Mailing Address: Same as Registered Business Address: .................................................................................
Telephone Number: ............................................................. Fax Number: ...............................................................
CONTACT INFORMATION
1. Business Contact Person: ................................................ Position: ......................................................................
Mobile Number: .................................................................. E-Mail: .......................................................................
2. Technical Contact Person: ............................................... Position: ......................................................................
Mobile Number: .................................................................. E-Mail: .......................................................................
3. Accounting Contact Person: ........................................... Position: ......................................................................
Mobile Number: ................................................................. E-Mail: .......................................................................
Contact person to receive the production account information:
First / Last Name: ............................................................... E-Mail: .......................................................................
SERVICES
Payment Gateway 123Service
BANK ACCOUNT INFORMATION
Account Name: .................................................................... Account Number: .......................................................
Bank Name / Branch: .......................................................... Account Type: ............................................................
APPLICANT SIGNATURE (seal)
Signature: ............................................................................. Signature: ...................................................................
First / Last Name: ................................................................. First / Last Name: .......................................................
Position: ................................................................................ Position: ......................................................................
Date: ............... / …............. / …............. Date: .............. / …............ / ................
FOR 2C2P OFFICER ONLY
CURRENCY: SGD USD OTHERS ………… MCC ………..………..
2C2P PGW: VISA ..………… % Mastercard ……….…... % JCB ………….. % AMEX ..……....%
UPI ……………..% IPP .……….….... %
123 Service: Internet Banking ….………....% Grabpay ….................% PayNow: ………......%
WeChat Pay …………% Alipay ……………%
Note: ..........................................................................................................................................................................
Name & Signature: .................................................................... Date: ................. / …................. / …......................
MERCHANT SERVICE AGREEMENT
Standard Template for Merchant Service Agreement_2C2PSingapore_OCT 2020_V.2 Page 2 of 5
AGREEMENT NUMBER: …………………………..
This agreement is entered into by and between
2C2P PTE. LTD. having its office at 30 Raffles Place, #32-
01, Singapore 048622 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Company”); and the applicant listed in “Merchant
Information”
THE PARTIES AGREE ON TERMS AND
CONDITIONS AS FOLLOWS:
1. PURPOSE
The Applicant desires to use payment gateway service for
receiving payment of goods and/or services from customers
and for its convenience making payment through available
channels including but not limited to banking payment,
counter service and ATM payment provided by the
Company (“Services”).
2. COMMENCEMENT OF SERVICES
The Applicant agrees to submit an application form correctly
and completely filled in together with supporting documents
required by the Company on the date hereof for the
Company’s consideration. The Applicant shall be entitled to
use the Services for receiving the payments for goods and/or
services of the Applicant only upon obtaining the
Company’s permission.
3. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF RISKS IN
ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS
The Applicant has carefully considered and realizes that
electronic transactions are of risk and accepts any
consequent damages incurred from such electronic
transactions. The Applicant agrees to strictly comply with
the following:
3.1 In case of receipt of the payments for goods and/or
services, the Applicant must keep, not less than eighteen (18)
months, sales record or proof of trade, delivery of
goods/services and receipt of payments such as tax invoice,
shipping slip, receipt, etc. as proof in any disputes happen
thereafter. If the Company desires to verify the Applicant’s
transactions, the Applicant agrees to provide the Company
with all relevant information and documents immediately or
within a specified period. The Applicant also agrees to assist
the Company in order to acquire such information and
documents and shall not, in any circumstances, obstruct,
weaken, destroy or hinder the Company from acquiring such
information and documents.
3.2 In case of refusal and/or non-receivable payment, card
cancellation or hold, or having a reasonable suspicion cause
regarding the dishonest use of credit card or any other
reasons causing the Company’s money to be deducted or
compensated or claimed as damages by any banks, financial
institutes or other persons, the Applicant agrees to reimburse
to the Company in full amount which and that the Company
is entitled to immediately set-off such amount with the
amount of payment for goods and/or services payable to the
Applicant without any objection or attempt to decline the
said responsibility in all respects.
4. SERVICE FEE
4.1 The Company is entitled to the service fee for
performance of obligations hereunder according to the rate
and payment method specified in the attachment.
4.2 The Applicant agrees that the Company is entitled to
immediately set-off the amount of payments for goods
and/or services to be transferred to the Applicant by the
Company with the amount of service fee including expenses
or any other fees that the Applicant is required to pay or
reimburse to the Company hereunder prior to transferring
such amount to the Applicant.
4.3 During the period of this Agreement, the Company
reserve the right to amend the rate of service fee by giving at
least thirty (30) days advance notice to the Applicant and
such notice shall be deemed an integral part of this
agreement.
5. 2C2P SERVICE
5.1 The Company shall gather all the payments for goods
and/or services on behalf of the Applicant and, after
deducting of the service fee according to Clause 4 and any
expenses (if any) such as credit card fees, etc., remit it to the
Applicant’s account within the specified period and
according to the payment method as per the attachment. The
Applicant agrees to be responsible for all fees incurred by
such remittance.
5.2 In case that the 2C2PMerchantID of the Applicant under
this Agreement has no movement for a six (6) month-period
continuously, the Applicant agrees to pay the Company a
monthly fee of SGD50 (Fifty Singapore Dollar), exclusive of
VAT or GST, to maintain 2C2PMerchantID from the
seventh month of non-movement. In event that funds in the
Applicant’s bank account are not sufficient, the Company
reserves the right to terminate this Agreement and close the
2C2PMerchant ID immediately.
The 2C2PMerchantID is the user account created by
the Company for the Applicant to use 2C2P Service.
5.3 Unless otherwise provided herein, the Company reserves
the right to open only one 2C2PMerchant ID for the
Applicant, if it appears that the Applicant has or obtains more
than one 2C2PMerchant ID, the Company is entitled to
cancel other 2C2PMerchant ID(s) and retain only one of
them for the Applicant.
6. 123 SERVICE
6.1 The Applicant has a duty to deliver information of goods
and/or services according to form and method as stipulated
by the Company immediately when customers make an order
of goods and/or services.
6.2 The Applicant represents and warrants that any
information delivered to the Company, under Clause 6.1 of
this Agreement, is correct. The Company shall not be
responsible for verifying such information.
MERCHANT SERVICE AGREEMENT
Standard Template for Merchant Service Agreement_2C2PSingapore_OCT 2020_V.2 Page 3 of 5
In case having received such monies from customers and it
is found that the paid amount is incorrect as a result of
information in Clause 6.1 of this Agreement, the Company
shall not be responsible for such error. The Company shall
not return such monies to customers, the Applicant shall be
solely responsible for such error to its customers.
6.3 The Company shall issue pay-in slip with a reference
number and a bar-code according to information as received
under Clause 6.1 to customers for making payment through
counter service, banking payment and ATM payment.
6.4 The Company shall gather all the payments for goods
and/or services on behalf of the Applicant and, after
deducting of the service fee according to Clause 4 and any
expenses (if any), remit it to the Applicant’s account within
the specified period and according to the payment method as
per the attachment. The Applicant agrees to be responsible
for all fees incurred by such remittance.
6.5 The limitation of receipt of the payment per transaction
shall be according to the term and condition of each 123
partner channels (e.g., payment counters, bank, etc.)
6.6 In case that the 123MerchantID of the Applicant under
this Agreement has no movement for a six (6)
month-period continuously, the Applicant agrees to pay the
Company a monthly fee of SGD50 (Fifty Singapore Dollar),
exclusive of VAT or GST, to maintain the 123MerchantID
from the seventh month of non-movement. In event that
funds in the Applicant’s bank account are not sufficient, the
Company reserves the right to terminate this Agreement and
close the 123MerchantID immediately.
The 123MerchantID is the user account created by
the Company for the Applicant to use 123 Service.
6.7 Unless otherwise provided herein, the Company reserves
the right to open only one 123MerchantID for the Applicant,
if it appears that the Applicant has or obtains more than one
123MerchantID, the Company is entitled to cancel other
123MerchantID(s) and retain only one of them for the
Applicant.
7. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE APPLICANT
7.1 The Applicant has a duty to issue receipts/tax invoices or
any evidence of receipt to customers and/or clients as
prescribed by law.
7.2 If the Applicant intends to modify its payment type
and/or amend the method or conditions for selling of goods,
engaging of services or performing of works, affecting to the
Company’s performance of Services hereunder, the
Applicant agrees to notify the Company of such in writing
thirty (30) days in advance. In this case, the Company
reserves the right to charge an additional fee as proper and
both parties shall agree and make it in writing and such
document shall be deemed an integral part of this
Agreement.
7.3 The Applicant agrees that the Company is entitled to set-
off all amounts which the Applicant is obligated to pay or
refund to the Company against the sum to be payable by the
Company to the Applicant under this Agreement without any
disputes. If the amount of Applicant’s account is not
sufficient to set-off, the Applicant agrees to pay outstanding
amount to the Company. In case of the Applicant fails to pay
such outstanding amount, the Company has the right to
charge an interest at the rate fifteen percent (15%) per annum
of outstanding amount from the due date until the date on
which all payments have been made in full.
7.4 The Applicant acknowledges and agrees that in case any
damages or errors occur from the Company’s performance
of Services according to information as delivered by the
Applicant, the Applicant shall not claim any damages against
the Company and/or shall be solely responsible for such
damages or errors with its customers.
8. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
The Applicant represents and warrants that (a) any
information delivered to the Company under this Agreement
is correct; (b) the Applicant is engaged in a lawful business
that includes the sale of Goods and/or Services, and duly
licenses to conduct such business under laws of all
jurisdictions in which Applicant conducts business.
Applicant shall comply with all laws, policies, guidelines,
regulations ordinances or rules applicable to Applicant’s
business and this Agreement; (c) all goods and/or services,
which the Company to receive the payments hereunder are
not goods and/or services prohibited by law and good morals
or that would expose the Company’s image to risk; and (d)
the Applicant shall comply with all Cardholder Information
Security Program (CISP), Site Data Protection (SDP), and
Payment Card Industry Standard (PCI) requirements, as
amended from time to time. The Applicant must comply with
the Rules, including without limitation, those relating to
Cardholder information security issues, non-disclosure of
Cardholder information and Transaction documents,
retention and storage of Cardholder and Transaction
information and other security procedures adopted by the
Card Organizations.
Failing of the above representations and warranties, the
Applicant agrees that the Company is entitled to terminate
this Agreement immediately and the Applicant shall be
responsible for all damages incurred to the Company,
including any loss occurred from the Applicant as the result
of its non-performance of this clause.
9. MARKETING ACTIVITIES
9.1 The Company may advertise and publicize in connection
with the Services provided to the Applicant and
the Applicant shall provide the cooperation with the
Company in the advertisement and publication through
various media or other networks from time to time as
mutually agreed by both parties.
9.2 The Applicant agrees to advertise and publicize its goods
or services as well as its use of the Company’s Services for
receipt of payments for goods and/or services of the
Applicant.
9.3 In the case that the Applicant uses any other service,
method or channel for receiving of payments for goods
and/or services from customers or clients, provided by other
service provider(s) other than the Company, the Applicant
agrees to not act such as publicizing, advertising, supporting
MERCHANT SERVICE AGREEMENT
Standard Template for Merchant Service Agreement_2C2PSingapore_OCT 2020_V.2 Page 4 of 5
or giving any right to such service, method or channel of
other service provider(s) significantly or in addition to doing
to the Services of the Company hereunder.
10. EXCLUSION
The Applicant acknowledges and agrees that in case the
Services hereunder has any error or delay or has been
temporally suspended, arising from service connection
system or computer system or any relevant system or virus
attack or electronic equipment problems and/or force
majeure or any causes beyond the Company’s control, the
Applicant shall not definitely raise such error to claim any
damages against the Company and shall notify the Company
immediately of such error. However, the Company will use
its best efforts to solve the problem hastily, and the Applicant
agrees to fully assist and cooperate with the Company for
solve such problem.
11. TERM AND TERMINATION
11.1 This Agreement shall be effective from the date hereof.
Any party who intends to terminate the Agreement shall give
advance written notice to the other party not less than ninety
(90) days prior to the termination of this Agreement.
11.2 This Agreement shall be terminated and the Company
is entitled to cease the Services forthwith by closing the
Applicant’s user account in any one of the following
circumstances:
(a) the Applicant uses and/or declares false
information; or
(b) the Applicant is in breach of any provision of the
Agreement, and the Applicant does not remedy said breach
within fifteen (15) days upon receipt of the relevant notice
from the other party, then the Company may
immediately terminate the Agreement or, at its option,
suspend the performance of its obligations under this
Agreement until the breach is remedied; or
(c) either party is adjudged bankrupt or dies or
ceases to exist as a juristic entity or having any other
legitimate ground which makes either party unable to
comply with this Agreement, it shall be deemed that this
Agreement is immediately terminated.
Upon termination of this Agreement in any case, the
Applicant shall announce the termination in a conspicuous
place that can be seen obviously by its customers and/or
clients. The announcement shall commence from the date the
Services is ceased and shall describe the contents that are
harmless to and promote both parties’ image.
This clause will not deprive the Company’s right of any
compensation and damages due to the termination hereof by
the Applicant’s acts.
11.3 Termination of this Agreement shall not prejudice nor
affect the accrued rights or claims and liabilities of the parties
under this Agreement.
12. TAX
Each party agree that either party shall deduct applicable
withholding tax and/or pay value added tax (“VAT”) and/or
Goods and Services Tax (“GST”) (if any) pursuant to the
obligation and at the rate as prescribed by laws.
The Applicant shall be solely responsible for stamp duty
according to this Agreement (if any).
13. CONFIDENTIALITY
The parties understand that all documents, information or
materials produced or acquired under this Agreement are
confidential information and trade secrets. Neither party is
entitled to disclose nor cause to be known by any way of such
confidential information and trade secrets to any third party
and agrees to properly keep them at any time either during
and after the period hereof, except for the disclosure required
by a court order or provisions of law.
14. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
The Company is an owner of all intellectual property right,
whether in contents or wording, pictures, signs, logo, trade/
service marks, trade name as well as all design works, in all
documents and websites of the Company. The Applicant
must not exploit the intellectual property rights of the
Company or make any advertisement without receiving prior
written consent from the Company. The Applicant shall not
perform or allow any third party to perform any action that
might cause damage to the image, trademark, trade name or
other intellectual property right of the Company.
15. AMENDMENT
Unless otherwise specified herein, any amendment, addition
or alteration of the terms and conditions under this
Agreement or Attachment shall be made in writing and
executed by the duly authorized representatives of both
parties.
16. GOVERNING LAW
This Agreement is governed by laws of Singapore.
17. MISCELLANEOUS
17.1 The Company shall have a duty only to collect the
amount of payments for goods and/or services on behalf of
the Applicant. The Company is not involved in any contracts
made between the Applicant’s customers and/or clients, the
Applicant Merchants’ customers and/or clients, and the
Applicant or in any right and duty among those parties. In
case any disputes occur from when the Applicant does not
comply with the terms and conditions of contracts made with
its customers and/or clients, the Company shall in no event
be liable or jointly liable. The Applicant shall be solely
responsible for such dispute to its customers and/ or clients.
MERCHANT SERVICE AGREEMENT
Standard Template for Merchant Service Agreement_2C2PSingapore_OCT 2020_V.2 Page 5 of 5
17.2 In no event shall the Company be responsible for
intentionally or negligently revealing to any other persons by
the Applicant of its and/or its customers’ bank account,
credit card, username and password information, or for
carelessly keeping of password, or in case that any other
person causes to be known such information or in case of
dishonesty of the Applicant and/or other person.
17.3 To provide the Services of the Company in compliance
with the security policy and this Agreement, if the Company
finds any transaction that is not correct or is within the scope
of dishonest acts in any means, the Applicant agrees that the
amount of such transaction will be confiscated and seized in
the system until any person expresses to claim it. If the
Company examines proof and has reasonable belief that such
person is the genuine owner, the Company will, after
deducting the service fee and expenses, be entitled to return
the net amount to that genuine owner immediately. The
applicant agrees to coordinate with the Company in
document and information examination as requested and
agrees that the Company may temporarily suspend the
Applicant’s user account.
17.4 The Applicant must not assign or transfer its rights,
duties, benefits or claims, in whole or in part, according to
this Agreement to any third party without the written consent
from the Company. In event the Applicant receives such
consent, the Applicant is still liable to the Company under
this Agreement in all respects. The Company is entitled to
transfer its rights, duties, benefits or claims. In whole or in
part, according to this Agreement to any third party without
consent from the Applicant.
17.5 Should any provision, condition, term or part of this
Agreement be null or invalid, the parties agree that any of the
valid remaining portions hereof shall be deemed separate
from such null or invalid parts and shall remain in full force
and effect.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF this Agreement is made in two (2) copies. The parties have thoroughly read and comprehended the
contents hereof and found that these correctly meet their intention. The parties have consequently executed and affixed their
company seal in the presence of witness and kept on copy each.
2C2P PTE. LTD. APPLICANT
…………………………………………………………........ ………………………………..…………………………….
Name: Name:
Designation: Designation:
Witness Witness
…………………………………………………………........ …..…………………………………………………………...
Name: Name:
Designation: Designation:


INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE EFT AUTHORIZATION AGREEMENT
All EFT requests are subject to a pre-certification period in which all accounts are verified by the qualifying
financial institution before any Medicare direct deposits are made.
PART I: REASON FOR SUBMISSION
Indicate your reason for completing this form by checking the appropriate box: New EFT enrollment or change
to your EFT enrollment account information. If you are authorizing EFT payments to the home office of a chain
organization of which you are a member, you must attach a letter authorizing the contractor to make payment
due the provider of service to the account maintained by the home office of the chain organization. The letter
must be signed by an authorized official of the provider of service and an authorized official of the chain home
office.
NOTE: If you have had either a change of ownership or change of practice location, you must submit a change
of information (using the Medicare enrollment application) to the Medicare contractor that services your
geographical area(s) prior to or accompanying this EFT authorization agreement submission.
PART II: ACCOUNT HOLDER INFORMATION
• Enter the provider’s/supplier’s legal business name or the name of the physician or individual practitioner, as
reported to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The account to which EFT payments made must bear the name of
the physician or individual practitioner, or the legal business name of the person or entity enrolled with Medicare.
NOTE: Providers/suppliers must report the legal business name provided on the IRS CP-575 form. Physicians and
individual practitioners who have granted a Medicare-enrolled provider or supplier the right to receive payments
for all of their services, is not required to complete this form. The account holder information should be of the
person or entity receiving the reassigned benefits (e.g., Medicare Identification Number, Authorized/Delegated
Official signature).
• Enter the Chain Home Office (CHO) legal business name. A CHO is an entity that provides centralized
management and administrative services to the providers or suppliers under common ownership and common
control, such as centralized accounting, purchasing, personnel services, management direction and control, and
other similar services.
NOTE: Providers/suppliers must report the legal business name provided on the IRS CP-575 form.
• Enter the account holder’s street address.
NOTE: Do Not Include PO Boxes.
• Enter the account holder’s city, state, and zip code.
• Enter the tax identification number as reported to the IRS. If the business is a group, organization or corporation,
provide the Federal employer identification number. If enrolling as an individual provide your Social Security
Number.
• Enter the 10 digit NPI number. The NPI is required to process this form.
• A provider/supplier may only have one EFT account per enrollment.
• If issued, enter the Medicare identification number assigned by a Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC).
If you are not enrolled in Medicare, leave this field blank. If more than one Medicare identification number is
attached to this NPI, include the Medicare identification numbers on this form.
NOTE: Institutional providers enter only ONE Medicare Identification Number (if issued).
Form CMS-588 Instructions (Rev: 11/2023) 1
PART III: FINANCIAL INSTITUTION INFORMATION
• Please include a confirmation of account information on bank letterhead or a voided check. When submitting the
documentation, it should contain the name on the account, electronic routing transit number, account number
and type. If submitting bank letterhead, the bank officer’s name and signature is also required. This information
will be used to verify your account number.
NOTE: Supporting bank documents must be in the provider’s/supplier’s/entity’s legal business name only.
• Enter your Financial Institution’s name (this is the name of the bank or qualifying depository that will receive the
funds).
NOTE: The Financial Institution’s name must be the Legal Business Name on the account, electronic routing transit
number and type.
NOTE: The account name to which EFT payments will be paid is to the name submitted on Part II of this form.
• Enter the financial institution’s street address.
NOTE: Do Not Include PO Boxes.
• Enter the financial institution’s city or town, state or province, and zip/postal code.
• Enter the bank or financial institutional telephone number and contact person’s name.
• Enter the bank or financial institutional nine-digit routing number, including applicable leading zeros.
• Enter the provider’s/supplier’s account number with the financial institution, including applicable leading zeros.
Select the account type.
NOTE: Supporting bank documents must be in the provider’s/supplier’s/entity’s legal business name only.
PART IV: CONTACT PERSON
• Enter the name and title of a contact person who can answer questions about the information submitted on this
CMS-588 form.
• Enter the contact person’s telephone number. Enter the contact person’s e-mail address.
PART V: AUTHORIZATION
By your signature on this form you are certifying that the account is drawn in the Name of the Physician or
Individual Practitioner, or the Legal Business Name of the person or entity. The person or entity has sole control
of the account to which EFT deposits are made in accordance with all applicable Medicare regulations and
instructions. All arrangements between the Financial Institution and the said person or entity are in accordance
with all applicable Medicare regulations and instructions with the effective date of the EFT authorization. You
must notify CMS regarding any changes in the account in sufficient time to allow the contractor and the Financial
Institution to act on the changes.
The EFT authorization form must be signed and dated by the same Authorized Representative or a Delegated
Official named on the CMS-855 Medicare enrollment application which the Medicare contractor has on file. Include
a telephone number where the Authorized Representative or Delegated Official can be contacted.
Upload this form to PECOS or mail this form to the Medicare contractor that services your geographical area. An
EFT authorization form must be submitted for each Medicare contractor to whom you submit claims for Medicare
payment. To locate the mailing address for your Medicare Administrative Contractor fee-for-service contractor, go
to: CMS.gov/Medicare/Provider-Enrollment-and-Certification/MedicareProviderSupEnroll/.
Form CMS-588 Instructions (Rev: 11/2023) 2
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES
Form Approved
OMB No. 0938-0626
Expires 11/2026
PART II: ACCOUNT HOLDER INFORMATION
Provider/Supplier Legal Business Name (If individual, please provide first name, middle initial, last name, and suffix)
Chain Organization Name or Home Office Legal Business Name (if different from Chain Organization Name) Chain Home Office number
Account Holder’s Street Address (Do Not Include PO Boxes.)
Account Holder’s City Account Holder’s State Account Holder’s Zip Code
Tax Identification Number (TIN) Designate TIN:
SSN (enrolling as an individual) OR
EIN (enrolling as a group/organization/corporation
National Provider Identifier Number (NPI) Medicare Identification Number (if issued)
Medicare Identification Number (if issued) Medicare Identification Number (if issued)
PART III: FINANCIAL INSTITUTION INFORMATION
Financial Institution’s Name
Financial Institution’s Street Address (Do Not Include PO Boxes.)
Financial Institution’s City/Town Financial Institution’s State/Province Financial Institution’s Zip Postal Code
Financial Institution’s Telephone Number (optional) Financial Institution’s Contact Person (optional)
Financial Institution Routing Transit Number (must be 9 digits)
Provider’s/Supplier’s Depositor Account Number with Financial Institution (include all zeroes) Type of Account (check one)
Checking Account Savings Account
NOTE: Starter checks are not acceptable for EFT confirmations.
PLEASE NOTE: In accordance with section 1104 of the Affordable Care Act, enrollment of electronic fund transfer
(EFT) is for electronic fund transfer authorization only. EFT enrollment does not constitute enrollment as a provider
or supplier in the Medicare program.
ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER (EFT) AUTHORIZATION AGREEMENT
PART I: REASON FOR SUBMISSION
Reason for Submission:
New EFT Enrollment
Individual Group
Change to Current EFT Enrollment
(e.g. account or bank changes)
Check here if EFT payment is being made to
the Chain Home Office
(Attach letter Authorizing EFT payment to
Chain Home Office)
Form CMS-588 (Rev: 11/2023) 3
SIGNATURE LINE
Authorized/Delegated Official Name (Print) Authorized/Delegated Official Telephone Number
Authorized/Delegated Official E-mail Address (optional)
Authorized/Delegated Official Signature (Note: Must be signed and dated to process.) Date
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT
Sections 1842, 1862(b) and 1874 of title XVIII of the Social Security Act authorize the collection of this information.
The purpose of collecting this information is to authorize electronic funds transfers.
Per 42 CFR 424.510(e)(1), providers and suppliers are required to receive electronic funds transfer (EFT) at the time
of enrollment, revalidation, change of Medicare contractors or submission of an enrollment change request; and
(2) submit the CMS-588 form to receive Medicare payment via electronic funds transfer.
The information collected will be entered into system No. 09-70-0501, titled “Carrier Medicare Claims Records,”
and No. 09-70-0503, titled “Intermediary Medicare Claims Records” published in the Federal Register Privacy Act
Issuances, 1991 Comp. Vol. 1, pages 419 and 424, or as updated and republished. Disclosures of information from
this system can be found in this notice.
You should be aware that P.L. 100-503, the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988, permits the
government, under certain circumstances, to verify the information you provide by way of computer matches.
According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, no persons are required to respond to a collection of information unless it displays a
valid OMB control number. The valid OMB control number for this information collection is 0938-0626. The time required to complete this
information collection is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, including the time to review instructions, search existing data resources,
gather the data needed, and complete and review the information collection. If you have any comments concerning the accuracy of the
time estimate(s) or suggestions for improving this form, please write to: CMS, Attn: PRA Reports Clearance Officer, 7500 Security Boulevard,
Baltimore, Maryland 21244-1850. DO NOT MAIL THIS FORM TO THIS ADDRESS. MAILING YOUR APPLICATION TO THIS ADDRESS WILL
SIGNIFICANTLY DELAY PROCESSING.
PART IV: CONTACT PERSON
This is the person we will contact for any questions regarding this EFT.
Contact Person’s Name Contact Person’s Title
Contact Person’s Telephone Number Contact Person’s E-mail Address
PART V: AUTHORIZATION
I hereby authorize the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) to initiate credit entries, and in accordance
with 31 CFR part 210.6(f) initiate adjustments for any duplicate or erroneous entries made in error to the account
indicated above. I hereby authorize the financial institution/bank named above to credit and/or debit the same
to such account. CMS may assign its rights and obligations under this agreement to CMS’ designated Medicare
Administrative Contractor (MAC). CMS may change its designated contractor at CMS’ discretion.
If payment is being made to an account controlled by a Chain Home Office, the Provider of Services hereby
acknowledges that payment to the Chain Office under these circumstances is still considered payment to the
Provider, and the Provider authorizes the forwarding of Medicare payments to the Chain Home Office.
If the account is drawn in the Physician’s or Individual Practitioner’s Name, or the Legal Business Name of the
Provider/Supplier, the said Provider/Supplier certifies that he/she has sole control of the account referenced
above, and certifies that all arrangements between the Financial Institution and the said Provider/Supplier are in
accordance with all applicable Medicare regulations and instructions.
This authorization agreement is effective as of the signature date below and is to remain in full force and effect
until CMS has received written notification from me of its termination in such time and such manner as to afford
CMS and the Financial Institution a reasonable opportunity to act on it. CMS will continue to send the direct
deposit to the Financial Institution indicated above until notified by me that I wish to change the Financial
Institution receiving the direct deposit. If my Financial Institution information changes, I agree to submit to CMS an
updated EFT Authorization Agreement.
Form CMS-588 (Rev: 11/2023) 4
(on the letter head of the PACS/FPO)
Letter of Undertaking Date : ………………………………
To
The Branch Manager
………………………………………….. DCCB Ltd.,
…………………………………………….. Branch
Sir,
Sub: Loan sanctioned for establishing Custom Hiring Centre (CHC)
We have been sanctioned a loan ……………………………………………….. (type of loan) for a sum
of Rs. ……………………………… (Rupees …………………………………… only) with interest thereon
by your bank at the rate of 8.30%/4% per annum, repayable in 48 months at 8 Half
yearly Installments.(Repayment Schedule).
In this connection, please take delivery of the Demand Promissory Note dated
…………………………… for Rs. ………………………………. made by us in favour of the Bank. We
undertake that in the event of the demand being made, we are liable to pay the principal
amount, interest, service charges and any other charges that may be due to the Bank.
Further, we agree that all rules of the Bank that are in force or may hereafter be in force
shall be binding upon us. We also hereby agree that any acknowledgement of debt/liability
made by payment or otherwise, in respect of liability outstanding on the Demand
Promissory Note, will be valid and binding on us.
Yours faithfully,
(Signature with stamp)

The Manager,
LETTER OF UNDERTAKING
(CC/ODT/ODP/OD/Term Loans)
L 005 (R-1)
Place :
Date :
Capital Small Finance Bank Limited,
Branch
Dear Sir,
Reg : My/our Loan/Limit of Rs. for the purpose of
In connection with the above I/We hereby undertake as under :
I/We shall deal exclusively with your bank and shall not deal with any other bank without your express
permission.
2. I/We shall pay the interest as amended/changed by the bank from time to time.
3. I/We shall pay charges including processing charges, insurance charges, incidental charges, inspection
charges, service charges, pre-closure charges & any other charges prescribed by the bank from time to time.
4. I/We shall pay the loan along with the interest by way of EMI of Rs. . The first
installment will commence on
5. I/We shall keep the vehicle/machinery/asset financed by the bank in good condition during the
currency of the loan.
6. I/We shall submit the Bill/receipt (with hypothecation clause) of the asset financed by the bank and/or of the
vehicles, RC, Insurance & route permit for the Banks record.
7. The vehicle shall be driven by the person holding a valid driving license.
8. I/We shall keep the machinery/asset/ vehicles/goods financed by the bank fully insured in the joint names
with the agreed bankclause.
9.
SO.
11.
1 2.
tn case of default in repayment of installment as per repayment schedule. I/We shall be liable to pay
interest @ over and above the agreed / contracted rate of interest.
In case of default of three consecutive installments, the entire amount of loan shall become payable on demand
and the bank shall be at liberty to initiate legal proceedings for recovery of bank‘s due.
Sales/Purchases shall be routed through the bank account.
I/We specifically undertake to pay pre-closure charges in case the account is taken over by some other
bank or it is repaid/adjusted before the scheduled repayment period as per bank’s rule.
13. I/We submit that we do not have any objection if our name is published in defaulter’s list of Reserve Bank of
India in the event of default on our part.
14. l/We confirm neither we have filed any legal suit against any party nor any suit/litigation is pending against
us/or any firm/company in which we are proprietor/partner or director.
15. No change in constitution of the firm shall be effected without specific permission of bank and that any change
in the holding pattern of the company shall be immediately intimated to the Bank.
16. I/We agree that drawing in the limit will not be allowed beyond the Drawing power/sanctioned limit.
17. I/We agree that cheque will not be honored other than the purpose specified/stipulated in the sanction.
18. I/We confirm the end use of the funds and undertake that the funds shall be utilized for the purpose for which
these have been sanctioned and there will be no diversion/siphoning of funds lent by the Bank.
19. That I/We are not related to any director’s/senior officers/promoters/major shareholders of the Bank and
they are not interested in loan/limit proposal whatsoever and no other person is having any interest in the
business in any manner.
20. I/We undertake that our name and/or name of our firm is not included in the RBI’s list of defaulters.
21 That the Bank may extend credit facilities solely at its discretion and that drawings under the following
circumstances will be solely at the discretion of the Bank :
* Drawings beyond the drawing power/sacntioned limits.
* Honouring of cheques issued for thepurpose other than specially stipulated inthe sanction.
* Drawings in account once it is classified as NPA.
* No drawings will be allowed in case of non compliance of the terms and conditions of the
sanction by the borrower.
* Meeting further requirement of borrowers on account of growth in business will be subject to
proper review of the credit limits.
22. That I/We will submit stock statement/age wise list of debtors on monthly/bi monthly basis as the case may
be on the prescribed proforma of the bank.
23. That I/We will submit QMS data (if applicable) on quarterly basis.
24. That I/We will allow the inspection of unit/asset financed by Bank and verification of the Bank accounts by the
bank officials at regular intervals and we will meet the cost of such inspection.
25. That the bank may recall the advance/accelerate the payment/accelerate the performance under the loan
agreement or seek additional securities upon serving of notices to borrowers in advance.
26. That the bank shall release all securities on receiving payment of loan and Bank may decide to exercise the right
to set off any legitimate right or lien for any other claim against us. However the Bank will notify the
borrower about the remaining claims and the documents under which the Bank is entitled to retain the
security till the relevant claim is paid/settled.
27. That the Bank will have right to elicit the necessary information from the borrower and initiate action to
protect its interest in case any information is not disclosed earlier by us and has come to the notice of the
Bank later.
28. That the property will not be rented out/leased out/sold out, without the consent of bank during the
currency of loan/limit.
29. I/We made here the standing instruction to the bank that the due instalment/interest/ charges may be
deducted or transferred from my/our SB/CC/ODT/ODP/CA No. for
repayment of loan account No. . This authority is irrevocable till the said loan
account is adjusted in full and final.
30. That the minimum average availment of the limit shall be 65% or as per the sanction. tn the event of less
availment commitment charges @ 2% or as prescribed in the sanction shall be charged on the gap in desired
level.
31. That net worth of the firm will not be allowed to decline from the present level or the level desired for the
availment of existing limit and in case of any shortfall, the net worth level will be maintained either by raising
additional unsecured loans or by inducting fresh capital in the business.
32. That I/We have not mortgaged the property (offered as security) to any financial/non-financial
institution and neither shall do so till the liquidation of the loan/limit nor I/We has have executed any power
of attorney to sell in favour of third party and I/We am/are absolute owner(s) in possession of the property.
33. I/We have been made to understand that the EMI paid by me/us shall be appropriated in the account
in the order of (1) Charges, (2) Interest and (3) Principal.
34. 1/We have gone through the sanction letter dated ...................... & accept the terms & conditions
embodied in the letter and a copy of the agreement has also been delivered to me by the Bank.
Yours faithfully
Borrower(s)
Guarantor(s)

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - I - BILL OF ENTRY SUMMARY
1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 1 85423100 HQ111555CX000 IC ANALOG SWITCH AW3641EDNR DFN-10 PD2236 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .036600 12000.000000 PCS 439.20 2 85332119 HQ11600241000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 390K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 35000.000000 PCS 12.60 3 85322400 HQ11701287000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 0.1?F K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000350 480000.000000 PCS 168.00 4 85322400 HQ11701288000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 33PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000170 330000.000000 PCS 56.10 5 85322400 HQ11701289000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 12PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 75000.000000 PCS 14.25 6 85322400 HQ11701296000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 15PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 15000.000000 PCS 5.40 7 85332119 HQ11600192000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 240 +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 8 85332119 HQ11600743000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 2.2 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000500 15000.000000 PCS 7.50 9 85334030 HQ1169002100G SMT THERMISTOR NTC 100K +-1% 4250K 0201 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .007680 15000.000000 PCS 115.2


STATUS 1.BE STATUS 2.MODE 3.DEF BE 4.KACHA 5.SEC 48 6.REIMP 7.ADV BE (Y/N/P) 8.ASSESS 9.EXAM 10.HSS 11.FIRST CHECK 12. PROV/ FINAL FIRST COPY Air T N N N N N N N N F 13.COUNTRY OF ORIGIN CHINA 14.COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT CHINA 15.PORT OF LOADING HONG KONG 16.PORT OF SHIPMENT HONG KONG

DECLARANT 1.IMPORTER NAME & ADDRESS BHAGWATI PRODUCTS LIMITED 2.CB NAME BSP LOGISTICS PVT LTD Fourth Floor of WTC one C, TZ-13A IT Park, Sector-techzone 3.AEO Greater Noida 201310 4.UCR AD CODE 0510005

SUMMARY 1.BCD 2.ACD 3.SWS 4.NCCD 5.ADD 6.CVD 7.IGST 8.G.CESS 18.TOT.ASS VAL 260963.6 0 26095.8 0 0 1371475 0 7332229 9.SG 10.SAED 11.GSIA 12.TTA 13.HEALTH 14.TOTAL DUTY 15.INT 16.PNLTY 17.FINE 9.TOT. AMOUNT 1658535 0 0 0 1658535

D.MANIFEST

DETAILS 1.IGM NO 2.IGM DATE 3.INW DATE 4.GIGMNO 5.GIGMDT 6.MAWB NO 7.DATE 8.HAWB NO 9.DATE 10.PKG 11.GW 2519217 05/06/2024 05/06/2024 0 93600620885 03/06/2024 HKG0004242 95 03/06/2024 15 756

E. BOND DETAILS 1.BOND NO. 2.PORT 3.BOND CD 4.DEBT AMT 5.BG AMT F. PAYMENT DETAILS 1.SR NO 2.CHALLAN NO 3.PAID ON 4.AMOUNT(Rs.) 2002260507 INDER6 EI 62527 0 1 2049439736 1658535

G.

WH 1.WBE NO. 2.DATE 3.WBE SITE 4.WH CODE INVOICE DETAILS - SUMMARY# 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO 3.INV. AMT 4.CUR 1 AL6988ABPL202406 86926.26 USD

H. PROCESSING

DETAILS 1.EVENT 2.DATE 3.TIME EXCHANGE RATE Submission 05-JUN-24 17:46 INR=INR Assessment 05-JUN-24 17:51 1 USD=84.35INR Examination OOC

CONTAINER DETAILS * 1.SNO 2.LCL/ FCL 3.TRUCK 4.SEAL 5.CONTAINER NUMBER OOC NO OOC DATE Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by DS DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SYSTEMS AND DATA MANAGEMENT 01 Date: 2024.06.05 17:53:03 IST Reason: CUSTOMS Location: INDIA

GLOSSARY

A : DEF - Deferred Payment, REIMP - Reimport, ADV - Advance, P - Prior, HSS - HighSeaSale; B : CB - Customs Broker, AEO - Authorized

Economic Operator, UCR - Unique Customs Reference; D : GIGM - Gateway IGM; G : WBE - WareHouse BE;


Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 10 85322400 HQ11701282000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 2.7PF +-0.25PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000390 15000.000000 PCS 5.85 11 85322400 HQ11701286000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 0.1?F K(+-10%) X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85 12 85322400 HQ11701303000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 1.2PF +-0.1PF 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000580 30000.000000 PCS 17.40 13 85322400 HQ11701304000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 0.47?F M(+-20%) X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000830 45000.000000 PCS 37.35 14 85332119 HQ11600195000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 2K +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 20000.000000 PCS 7.20 15 85332119 HQ11600231000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 47K +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 45000.000000 PCS 12.15

ITEM DETAILS 16 85332119 HQ11600234000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 22 +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 135000.000000 PCS 36.45 17 85332119 HQ11600235000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 36 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 30000.000000 PCS 10.80 18 85332119 HQ11600247000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 200K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 15000.000000 PCS 5.40 19 85332119 HQ11600310001 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 390 +-5% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000600 30000.000000 PCS 18.00 20 85332119 HQ11600634000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 470 +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 15000.000000 PCS 5.40 21 85332119 HQ11610015000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/16W 5.1 +-1% 0402(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000400 20000.000000 PCS 8.00 22 85332119 HQ11612920001 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/16W 15 +-1% 0402(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000240 20000.000000 PCS 4.80 23 85332119 HQ1162062F000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/10W 0.91 +-1% 0603 TA-I (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001500 25000.000000 PCS 37.50 24 85322400 HQ11700147000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 1?F M(+-20%)X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000890 15000.000000 PCS 13.35

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 25 85322400 HQ11700147000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 1?F M(+-20%)X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000890 15000.000000 PCS 13.35 26 85322400 HQ11701276000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 22PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000180 15000.000000 PCS 2.70 27 85322400 HQ11701294000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 220PF K C0G0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000200 45000.000000 PCS 9.00 28 85322400 HQ11701298000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 1000PF +-10%X7R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000180 60000.000000 PCS 10.80 29 85322400 HQ11701281000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 1?F M(+-20%) X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000570 1005000.000000 PCS 572.85 30 85322400 HQ11701281000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 1?F M(+-20%) X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000570 450000.000000 PCS 256.50

ITEM DETAILS 31 85332119 HQ11610620001 SMD RESISTOR 1/16W 0 +-5% 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000170 20000.000000 PCS 3.40 32 85332119 HQ1163033R000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/2W 5M +-1% 0805 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .017400 12000.000000 PCS 208.80 33 85332119 HQ11600222000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 4.7K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 30000.000000 PCS 10.80 34 85332119 HQ11600674000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 51 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 35 85332119 HQ11602963000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 0 J 0201 TA-I (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000150 525000.000000 PCS 78.75 36 85322400 HQ11701278000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 100PF J C0G0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001200 405000.000000 PCS 486.00 37 85322400 HQ11701283000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 10000PF +-10% X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 45000.000000 PCS 8.55 38 85322400 HQ11701297000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 0.5PF +-0.05PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .002240 60000.000000 PCS 134.40 39 85322400 HQ11701302000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 82PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000420 15000.000000 PCS 6.30

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 40 85332119 HQ11600926000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000500 15000.000000 PCS 7.50 RESISTOR 1/20W 1 +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 41 85045090 HQ11880732000 WIRE WOUND CHIP .009500 48000.000000 PCS 456.00 INDUCTOR 0.47UH +-20% 5A 5.9A25M 0806 0.2V (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 42 85322400 HQ17101003X70 MULTILAYER .002000 160000.000000 PCS 320.00 CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 225 M X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 43 85322400 HQ17101003X70 MULTILAYER .002000 30000.000000 PCS 60.00 CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 225 M X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 44 74102200 HQ25803001JZ2 PMU SHIELDING CASE .001790 21000.000000 PCS 37.59 CONDUCTIVE COPPER FOIL MT252 XNC7723 WITH SINGLE SIDE BACK ADHESIVE (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF 45 74102200 HQ25803001QU2 PMU SHIELDING .021000 12000.000000 PCS 252.00 CASE CONDUCTIVE COPPER FOIL

ITEM DETAILS MT252 XNC7723 WITH SINGLE SIDE BACK ADHESIVE (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF 46 85366990 HQ11930096000 RF CONNECTORS .016700 10000.000000 PCS 167.00 3.2.08.0740 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 47 85366990 HQ12060736000 COAXIAL LINE .002330 12000.000000 PCS 27.96 SUPPORT MTH163 SUS301-H TIN- PLATED TF (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 48 85423100 HQ140070000M0 IC MMPA FX5627Y .465000 12000.000000 PCS 5580.00 3G/4G LGA LANSUS (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 49 85423100 HQ140080000L0 IC 2G_TXM FX5596Y .326000 12000.000000 PCS 3912.00 2G 2G LANSUS (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 50 85177990 HQ168100000T0 DUPLEXER SAW .052200 8000.000000 PCS 417.60 SFX897CHK02 BAND5 1612 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 51 73269099 HQ180140000L0 ONE DRAG THREE SIM .045900 12000.000000 PCS 550.80 CARD SUPPORT MT235 SUS301-H(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 52 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003400 66000.000000 PCS 224.40 SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 53 73209090 HQ12060769000 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003920 45000.000000 PCS 176.40 SPRING PIECE 1.6?1.2?1.25 YCUT-FX- EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 54 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003400 30000.000000 PCS 102.00 SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 55 85045090 HQ11801134000 CHIP INDUCTOR 0.6NH .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 +-0.1NH 850MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 56 85045090 HQ11801135000 CHIP INDUCTOR 1.0NH .000770 45000.000000 PCS 34.65 +-0.1NH 750MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 57 85045090 HQ11811110000 CHIP INDUCTOR 68NH .001450 10000.000000 PCS 14.50 J 150MA 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 58 85045090 HQ11880742000 SMT LAMINATE .009500 60000.000000 PCS 570.00 POWER INDUCTOR 1.0UH +-20% 3.9A 4.7A 58M 0806 20V (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 59 85045090 HQ11880851000 SMT LAMINATE .013300 12000.000000 PCS 159.60 POWER INDUCTOR 10UH +-20% 0.8A 1.1A 500M 1008 40V (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 60 85366990 HQ11970075000 ANTENNA .014200 24000.000000 PCS 340.80 CONNECTOR 818011998 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 61 85423100 HQ13404000140 IC LDO WL2848D28- .016500 10000.000000 PCS 165.00 4/TR 2.8V 300MA (FOR MFG OF PCBA

ITEM DETAILS OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 62 85177990 HQ168090004L0 BAND-PASS FILTER .024500 10000.000000 PCS 245.00 SAW HDFB41PPSS-B5 2535-2675MHZ 1109 PD2327 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 63 85177990 HQ168100002Q0 DUPLEXER SAW .027000 10000.000000 PCS 270.00 B39881B1307P810 BAND5 1612 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 64 85045090 HQ11801136000 CHIP INDUCTOR 82NH .001300 15000.000000 PCS 19.50 +-5% 100MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 65 85045090 HQ11880342000 SMT LAMINATE .017000 12000.000000 PCS 204.00 POWER INDUCTOR 1UH +-25% 4.2A 4.7A 30M 1008 20V (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 66 85045090 HQ11881711000 SMT LAMINATE .012650 12000.000000 PCS 151.80 POWER INDUCTOR 4.7UH +-20% 1A 1.7A 370M 0806 40V (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 67 85177990 HQ16808000120 BAND-PASS FILTER .014500 15000.000000 PCS 217.50 SAW MS11U2G45-W1D 2401~2483MHZ 1109 PD2327 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 68 85411000 HQ169020003E0 SMT TVS DIODE .017000 20000.000000 PCS 340.00 LTVS8H5.0CFT5G 300PF SOD882 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 69 85322400 HQ17101001M40 MULTILAYER .004200 60000.000000 PCS 252.00 CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 106 M X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 70 73269099 HQ269090002R2 SPEAKER BRACKET .011200 14000.000000 PCS 156.80 (RIGHT) MT252 STAINLESS STEEL(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 71 74094000 HQ26910001NE2 SHIELDING CASE MT252 MS2623M-RF CUPRONICKEL WITH COMPOSITE INSULATING FILM ARB (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULA .021600 12000.000000 PCS 259.20 72 85322400 HQ11701339000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 4700PF +-10%X7R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 30000.000000 PCS 10.80 73 85322400 HQ11701464000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 10PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 15000.000000 PCS 5.40 74 85322400 HQ11703543000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 1PF +-0.25PFNPO 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001400 45000.000000 PCS 63.00 75 85322400 HQ11712230002 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 2.2?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000900 150000.000000 PCS 135.00 76 85045090 HQ11801026000 CHIP INDUCTOR 1.5NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10

ITEM DETAILS 77 85045090 HQ11801035000 CHIP INDUCTOR 8.2NH +-5% 250MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10 78 85045090 HQ11801039000 CHIP INDUCTOR 18NH +-5% 200MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 135000.000000 PCS 103.95 79 85045090 HQ11801049000 CHIP INDUCTOR 1.8NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 45000.000000 PCS 34.65 80 85045090 HQ11801056000 CHIP INDUCTOR 3.6NH +-0.3NH 400MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000750 30000.000000 PCS 22.50 81 85322400 HQ11701384000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 3PF +-0.25PFC0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000200 45000.000000 PCS 9.00 82 85322400 HQ11710024000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 10?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .003610 320000.000000 PCS 1155.20 83 85322400 HQ1171401C000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 106 M X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .002100 200000.000000 PCS 420.00 84 85322400 HQ11712240002 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001500 70000.000000 PCS 105.00 85 85322400 HQ11712240002 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001500 130000.000000 PCS 195.00

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 86 85322400 HQ11720002000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 22?F M(+-20%) X5R 0603 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .003720 72000.000000 PCS 267.84 87 85322400 HQ11720025000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 10?F M(+-20%) X5R 0603 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .015500 48000.000000 PCS 744.00 88 74094000 HQ26910001NB2 SHIELDING CASE MT252 MS3526M-BB CUPRONICKEL WITH COMPOSITE INSULATING FILM ARB (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULA .028100 9000.000000 PCS 252.90 89 85322400 HQ11701383000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 3.3PF +-0.25PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000690 30000.000000 PCS 20.70 90 85322400 HQ11701404000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 4.7PF +-0.25PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000200 30000.000000 PCS 6.00 91 85322400 HQ11701437000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 6.8PF +-0.25C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000460 45000.000000 PCS 20.70

ITEM DETAILS 92 85322400 HQ11710036000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 10?F M X5R 0402 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .003290 10000.000000 PCS 32.90 93 85322400 HQ11710051000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001590 20000.000000 PCS 31.80 94 85322400 HQ11710051000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 10V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001590 60000.000000 PCS 95.40 95 85322400 HQ11720013000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 1?F K(+-10%)X5R 0603 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .002220 24000.000000 PCS 53.28 96 85045090 HQ11801025000 CHIP INDUCTOR 1.2NH +-0.1NH 750MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 45000.000000 PCS 34.65 97 85045090 HQ11801034000 CHIP INDUCTOR 7.5NH J 300MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001300 45000.000000 PCS 58.50 98 85045090 HQ11801041000 CHIP INDUCTOR 27NH +-5% 140MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000930 45000.000000 PCS 41.85 99 85045090 HQ11801051000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.2NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 60000.000000 PCS 46.20 100 85045090 HQ11801054000 CHIP INDUCTOR 3.0NH +-0.1NH 450MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 60000.000000 PCS 46.20 101 85045090 HQ11801055000 CHIP INDUCTOR 3.3NH +-0.3NH 450MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 45000.000000 PCS 34.65

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 102 85322400 HQ11701403000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 1.8PF +-0.1PF NP0 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000690 30000.000000 PCS 20.70 103 85322400 HQ11701409000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 1.5PF +-0.1PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10 104 85322400 HQ11701689000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 150PF K X7R0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000280 15000.000000 PCS 4.20 105 85322400 HQ11712276000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 16V 2.2?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .012140 10000.000000 PCS 121.40 106 85322400 HQ11712727000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 0.047?F K(+-10%) X7R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001130 10000.000000 PCS 11.30 107 85045090 HQ11801036000 CHIP INDUCTOR 10NH +-5% 250MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10

ITEM DETAILS 108 85045090 HQ11801037000 CHIP INDUCTOR 12NH +-5% 250MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 45000.000000 PCS 34.65 109 85045090 HQ11801038000 CHIP INDUCTOR 15NH +-5% 250MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10 110 85045090 HQ11801042000 CHIP INDUCTOR 33NH J 120MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000930 15000.000000 PCS 13.95 111 85045090 HQ11801050000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.0NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 112 85045090 HQ11801052000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.4NH +-0.1NH 500MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 113 85045090 HQ11801053000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.7NH +-0.1NH 500MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10 114 85045090 HQ11801057000 CHIP INDUCTOR 3.9NH +-0.3NH 400MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 115 85045090 HQ11801129000 CHIP INDUCTOR 5.1NH +-0.3NH 350MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000810 30000.000000 PCS 24.30 116 85045090 HQ11801132000 CHIP INDUCTOR 9.1NH J 250MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000780 15000.000000 PCS 11.70 117 74094000 HQ26910001NB2 SHIELDING CASE MT252 MS3526M-BB CUPRONICKEL WITH COMPOSITE INSULATING FILM ARB (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULA .028100 2500.000000 PCS 70.25 118 85177990 HQ180140000G0 MICRO SD CASSETTE 1.080A0-008-5R0 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .021500 13000.000000 PCS 279.50

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 119 74094000 HQ26910001NK2 SHIELDING CASE .012700 12000.000000 PCS 152.40 MT252 MS2109M-CHARGER CUPRONICKEL WITH COMPOSITE INSULATING FILM ARB (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CE 120 74094000 HQ26910001NC2 SHIELDING CASE .033200 11500.000000 PCS 381.80 MT252 MS4227M-PMU CUPRONICKEL WITH COMPOSITE INSULATING FILM ARB (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLUL 121 74094000 HQ26910001NG2 SHIELDING CASE .014600 12000.000000 PCS 175.20 MT252 MS1412M-WCN CUPRONICKEL WITH COMPOSITE INSULATING FILM ARB (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLUL 122 73269099 HQ269090002U2 SPEAKER BRACKET .011200 14000.000000 PCS 156.80 (LEFT) MT252 STAINLESS STEEL (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 123 85177990 HQ180140000H0 SIM CASSETTE 0.3+- .020900 24000.000000 PCS 501.60 0.05 1.079A0-006-5R0 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 124 85423100 HQ111555D8000 IC CHARGING IC .159000 12000.000000 PCS 1908.00 SGM41513DYTQF24G/TR TQFN-4?4-

ITEM DETAILS 24L SGM (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 125 85423300 HQ111C0354000 IC AUDIO FREQUENCY .170000 12000.000000 PCS 2040.00 AMPLIFIER FS1599N FCQFN-16L(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 126 85423100 HQ11153805000 IC BIAS OLED .065000 12000.000000 PCS 780.00 AW37501CSR WLCSP (FOR MFG OF PCBAOF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 127 85423100 HQ111M0176000 IC ELNA CMOS .011350 13500.000000 PCS 153.23 AW5005EDNR 1550-1615 DFN 1.5?1.0?0.55 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 128 85131090 HQ1121100300H LED FLASH LIGHT .020000 12000.000000 PCS 240.00 WHITE 380LM 5250-5750K PCT (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 129 85177990 HQ114F0245000 DUPLEXER SAW .023000 12000.000000 PCS 276.00 NDFE015-1950XA BAND1 1814 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 130 85045090 HQ11540537000 CHIP BEAD 220 .003100 24000.000000 PCS 74.40 100MHZ +-25% 1.5A 0603 HPZ1608D221-1R2TF (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 131 85332119 HQ11600019000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000270 225000.000000 PCS 60.75 1K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 132 85423100 HQ11150278000 IC LED DRIVER .030000 12000.000000 PCS 360.00 BACKLIGHT SGM3756YTDI6G/TR 1 1.5A TDFN-2?2-6L SGM (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 133 85423100 HQ11170550000 IC RF SWITCH SP8T .024000 12000.000000 PCS 288.00 CMOS MXD8680 29 QFN 2020 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 134 85423100 HQ111J0263000 IC RF SWITCH DPDT CMOS WS7822LE-10/TR 40 LGA 1511 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .031500 12000.000000 PCS 378.00 135 85177990 HQ114E0144000 BAND-PASS FILTER SAW HDF1588EHQ-B5 1559-1606MHZ 1109 SHOULDER (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .011430 10000.000000 PCS 114.30 136 85177990 HQ114E0520000 BAND-PASS FILTER SAW MS11U881M-RX05S2 BAND5 1109 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .009800 10000.000000 PCS 98.00 137 85332119 HQ11600009000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 100K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 138 74102200 HQ25803001JX2 WCN SHIELDING CASE CONDUCTIVE COPPER FOIL MT252 XNC7723 WITH SINGLE SIDE BACK ADHESIVE (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF .002900 9000.000000 PCS 26.10 139 85423100 HQ11180839000 IC COMPASS QMC6308 CSP QST (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .060300 10000.000000 PCS 603.00

ITEM DETAILS 140 85411000 HQ11200496000 SMT SCHOTTKY BARRIER DIODE LDSR01S30ST5G DFN0603-DL (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .004890 15000.000000 PCS 73.35 141 85411000 HQ11510316000 SMT TVS DIODE LTVS16H5.0ET5G 800PF DFN1610 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .012590 16000.000000 PCS 201.44 142 85045090 HQ11540343000 CHIP BEAD 1K 100MHZ +-25% 0.2A 0201 (FOR MFGOF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .002820 15000.000000 PCS 42.30 143 85332119 HQ11600021000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 100 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 135000.000000 PCS 36.45 144 85332119 HQ11600033000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 120K +-0.1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000360 15000.000000 PCS 5.40 145 74102200 HQ25803001JV2 BB SHIELDING CASE CONDUCTIVE COPPER FOIL MT252XNC7723 WITH SINGLE SIDE BACK ADHESIVE (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF .003640 12000.000000 PCS 43.68 146 74102200 HQ25803001JX2 WCN SHIELDING CASE CONDUCTIVE COPPER FOIL MT252 XNC7723 WITH SINGLE SIDE BACK ADHESIVE (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF .002900 3000.000000 PCS 8.70 147 85423100 HQ11155023000 IC LDO WL2848D18- 4/TR 1.8V 300MA DFN1X1 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .025000 10000.000000 PCS 250.00 148 85423100 HQ11180648000 IC PHOTOELECTRIC SENSOR MN78911DKBS DNF-8PIN EMINENT (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .158000 12000.000000 PCS 1896.00

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 149 85411000 HQ11200480000 SMT SCHOTTKY .006030 10000.000000 PCS 60.30 BARRIER DIODE LMBR4010BST5G SOD882 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 150 85177990 HQ114E0147000 BAND-PASS FILTER .011430 10000.000000 PCS 114.30 SAW HDFB08ARSSHQ-B5 BAND8 1109 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 151 85177990 HQ114E0521000 BAND-PASS FILTER .010000 10000.000000 PCS 100.00 SAW MS11U2G35-RX40C2 BAND40 2.0?1.25?0.9 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 152 85177990 HQ114E0534000 BAND-PASS FILTER .009600 10000.000000 PCS 96.00 SAW MS11U1G84-RX03S2 BAND3 1109 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 153 85411000 HQ11510326000 SMT TVS DIODE .004200 20000.000000 PCS 84.00 LTVS8H4.5CBT5G 70PF SOD882 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 154 85177990 HQ11520093000 COMMON-MODE .005360 10000.000000 PCS 53.60 FILTER SDMM0605H-2-900T 0605

ITEM DETAILS (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 155 85045090 HQ11540050002 CHIP BEAD 1000 .002080 20000.000000 PCS 41.60 100MHZ +-25% 250MA 0402 PD2226(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 156 85332119 HQ11600035000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 15000.000000 PCS 4.05 RESISTOR 1/20W 200 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 157 85332119 HQ11600097000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 RESISTOR 1/20W 150 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 158 85423100 HQ1114219W000 IC CC LOGIC .066000 12000.000000 PCS 792.00 ET7304M1 WLCSP-9 (FOR MFG OF PCBAOF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 159 85334030 HQ11300665000 CRYSTAL UNITS WITH .057800 12000.000000 PCS 693.60 THERMISTOR 26MHZ 2PPM 25204 7PF 4250K 0.9+0.1/-0.1MM H.ELE NEW (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CEL 160 85177990 HQ1147014C000 BAND-PASS FILTER .018800 10000.000000 PCS 188.00 SAW MS11U2G35-TX40CH B40 1109(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 161 85177990 HQ114C0091000 TRIPLEXER LTCC .012400 12000.000000 PCS 148.80 MTPX21H152450P69-T02M GPS/WIFI/BT 2016 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 162 85177990 HQ114E0150000 BAND-PASS FILTER .011430 10000.000000 PCS 114.30 SAW HDFB41BRSSHQ-B5 B41 1.1?0.9?0.55 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 163 85177990 HQ114E0535000 BAND-PASS FILTER .009600 10000.000000 PCS 96.00 SAW MS11U2G14-RX01S2 BAND1 1109 PD2327 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 164 85177990 HQ114F0009000 DUPLEXER SAW .051700 12000.000000 PCS 620.40 D6FH1G842A3CZ-Z B3 1814 (FOR MFGOF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 165 85411000 HQ1151176Q000 ESD LESD8HL15CT5G .030680 30000.000000 PCS 920.40 1PF SOD882 (FOR MFG OF PCBAOF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 166 85045090 HQ11540009000 CHIP BEAD 1K .000740 20000.000000 PCS 14.80 100MHZ +-1MHZ 200MA 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 167 85332119 HQ11600016000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 60000.000000 PCS 16.20 RESISTOR 1/20W 33 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 168 85332119 HQ11600055000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 45000.000000 PCS 12.15 RESISTOR 1/20W 10K +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE

ITEM DETAILS PHONE) 169 85045090 HQ11540388000 CHIP BEAD 120 .002010 30000.000000 PCS 60.30 100MHZ +-25% 200MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 170 85423100 HQ11180515000 IC ACCELERATION .144200 10000.000000 PCS 1442.00 SENSOR MC3419-P LGA PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 171 85340000 HQ18301005AY0 BARE PCB BOARD .450000 11840.000000 PCS 5328.00 PD2327FEXM-0 133.44?94.44?0.66/4 OSP (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 172 85411000 HQ11510277000 SMT TVS DIODE .005600 15000.000000 PCS 84.00 LESD11LL5.0CT5G 0.3PF DFN0603- DL(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 173 85411000 HQ11510326000 SMT TVS DIODE .004200 40000.000000 PCS 168.00 LTVS8H4.5CBT5G 70PF SOD882 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 174 85411000 HQ11510478000 SMT TVS DIODE .018700 12000.000000 PCS 224.40 LTVS20H24AT5G 850PF DFN2020-3 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 175 85045090 HQ11540050002 CHIP BEAD 1000 .002080 60000.000000 PCS 124.80 100MHZ +-25% 250MA 0402 PD2226(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 176 85332119 HQ11600009000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 100K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 177 85332119 HQ11600223000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000790 15000.000000 PCS 11.85 RESISTOR 1/20W 470K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 178 85334030 HQ1169002100G SMT THERMISTOR NTC 100K +-1% 4250K 0201 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .007680 30000.000000 PCS 230.40 179 85322400 HQ11701278000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 100PF J C0G0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001200 60000.000000 PCS 72.00 180 85322400 HQ11701302000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 82PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000420 30000.000000 PCS 12.60 181 85322400 HQ11701338000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 2200PF K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85 182 85322400 HQ11701381000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 39PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85 183 85322400 HQ11703534000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 0.0047?F K X7R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000350 15000.000000 PCS 5.25

ITEM DETAILS 184 85322400 HQ11712240002 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001500 10000.000000 PCS 15.00 185 85045090 HQ11801051000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.2NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 186 85411000 HQ11510289000 TVS DIODE ESD LESD11D5.0CT5G 15PF DFN0603-D (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .003500 15000.000000 PCS 52.50 187 85411000 HQ11510927000 ESD ES12DFH 185PF 1?0.6 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .013200 20000.000000 PCS 264.00 188 85332119 HQ11600019000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 1K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 15000.000000 PCS 4.05 189 85332119 HQ11602963000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 0 J 0201 TA-I (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000150 30000.000000 PCS 4.50 190 85332119 HQ11615005000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/16W 487K +-1% 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000310 10000.000000 PCS 3.10 191 85322400 HQ11701282000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 2.7PF +-0.25PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000390 15000.000000 PCS 5.85 192 85322400 HQ11701287000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 0.1?F K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000350 15000.000000 PCS 5.25

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 193 85322400 HQ11701288000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000170 15000.000000 PCS 2.55 CAPACITORS 50V 33PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 194 85322400 HQ11701291000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000420 15000.000000 PCS 6.30 CAPACITORS 16V 0.1?F +-20%X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 195 85322400 HQ11701440000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000210 15000.000000 PCS 3.15 CAPACITORS 50V 120PF K X7R0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 196 85322400 HQ11710027000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001610 10000.000000 PCS 16.10 CAPACITORS 16V 1?F K X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 197 85322400 HQ11712746000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001680 10000.000000 PCS 16.80 CAPACITORS 50V 104 M X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 198 85322400 HQ11712764000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .019100 10000.000000 PCS 191.00 CAPACITORS 50V 0.01?F +-10%X7R

ITEM DETAILS 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 199 85412900 HQ16302000110 SMT FIELD EFFECT .038240 12000.000000 PCS 458.88 TRANSISTOR N-CH CJMN3010L DFNWB2?2-6L JSCJ (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 200 85423100 HQ11155326000 IC OVP 6.8V 30M .050500 12000.000000 PCS 606.00 SGM40666ASYG/TR WLCSP-1.65?1.24- 12B (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 201 85340000 HQ18301005B00 BARE PCB BOARD .085000 1600.000000 PCS 136.00 PD2327FEXNA-0 128.87?105.7?0.5/16 OSP (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 202 73209090 HQ12060774000 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .004540 32000.000000 PCS 145.28 SPRING PIECE 1.85?1.2?1.5 YCUT-FX- EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 203 85366990 HQ18002000080 EARPHONE SOCKET .037600 11900.000000 PCS 447.44 3.2.11.0482 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 204 85366990 HQ180050001F0 USB SOCKET 3.151A1- .206000 12000.000000 PCS 2472.00 016-8R0 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 205 85366990 HQ11930096000 RF CONNECTORS .016700 10000.000000 PCS 167.00 3.2.08.0740 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 206 85181000 HQ12030132000 MICROPHONE -38DB .081000 11400.000000 PCS 923.40 +-1DB 2.7?1.85?0.9MM SMT BOTAN M (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 207 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003400 30000.000000 PCS 102.00 SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 208 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003400 30000.000000 PCS 102.00 SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 209 85366990 HQ180050001F0 USB SOCKET 3.151A1- .206000 21600.000000 PCS 4449.60 016-8R0 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 210 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003400 114000.000000 PCS 387.60 SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 211 85366990 HQ18002000080 EARPHONE SOCKET .037600 22100.000000 PCS 830.96 3.2.11.0482 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 212 85366990 HQ11930096000 RF CONNECTORS .016700 30000.000000 PCS 501.00 3.2.08.0740 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 213 85181000 HQ12030132000 MICROPHONE -38DB .081000 22800.000000 PCS 1846.80 +-1DB 2.7?1.85?0.9MM SMT BOTAN M (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 214 73209090 HQ12060774000 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .004540 64000.000000 PCS 290.56

ITEM DETAILS SPRING PIECE 1.85?1.2?1.5 YCUT-FX- EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 215 85423100 HQ11155326000 IC OVP 6.8V 30M .050500 24000.000000 PCS 1212.00 SGM40666ASYG/TR WLCSP-1.65?1.24- 12B (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 216 85411000 HQ11510927000 ESD ES12DFH 185PF .013200 50000.000000 PCS 660.00 1?0.6 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 217 85412900 HQ16302000110 SMT FIELD EFFECT .038240 24000.000000 PCS 917.76 TRANSISTOR N-CH CJMN3010L DFNWB2?2-6L JSCJ (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 218 85411000 HQ11510326000 SMT TVS DIODE .004200 70000.000000 PCS 294.00 LTVS8H4.5CBT5G 70PF SOD882 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 219 85045090 HQ11540050002 CHIP BEAD 1000 .002080 110000.000000 PCS 228.80 100MHZ +-25% 250MA 0402 PD2226(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 220 85332119 HQ11602963000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000150 165000.000000 PCS 24.75 0 J 0201 TA-I (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 221 85322400 HQ11701287000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000350 30000.000000 PCS 10.50 CAPACITORS 6.3V 0.1?F K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 222 85322400 HQ11701338000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000190 30000.000000 PCS 5.70 CAPACITORS 25V 2200PF K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 223 85322400 HQ11712240002 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001500 30000.000000 PCS 45.00 CAPACITORS 6.3V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 224 85322400 HQ11712746000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001680 20000.000000 PCS 33.60 CAPACITORS 50V 104 M X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 225 85411000 HQ11510277000 SMT TVS DIODE .005600 15000.000000 PCS 84.00 LESD11LL5.0CT5G 0.3PF DFN0603- DL(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 226 85411000 HQ11510478000 SMT TVS DIODE .018700 24000.000000 PCS 448.80 LTVS20H24AT5G 850PF DFN2020-3 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 227 85332119 HQ11600352000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 RESISTOR 1/20W 680 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 228 85334030 HQ1169002100G SMT THERMISTOR .007680 45000.000000 PCS 345.60 NTC 100K +-1% 4250K 0201 (FORMFG

ITEM DETAILS OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 229 85322400 HQ11701278000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001200 90000.000000 PCS 108.00 CAPACITORS 50V 100PF J C0G0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 230 85322400 HQ11701281000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000570 30000.000000 PCS 17.10 CAPACITORS 6.3V 1?F M(+-20%) X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 231 85322400 HQ11701288000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000170 30000.000000 PCS 5.10 CAPACITORS 50V 33PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 232 85322400 HQ11701291000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000420 30000.000000 PCS 12.60 CAPACITORS 16V 0.1?F +-20%X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 233 85322400 HQ11701302000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000420 90000.000000 PCS 37.80 CAPACITORS 50V 82PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 234 85322400 HQ11701381000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85 CAPACITORS 50V 39PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 235 85322400 HQ11703534000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000350 30000.000000 PCS 10.50 CAPACITORS 25V 0.0047?F K X7R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 236 85322400 HQ11710027000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001610 20000.000000 PCS 32.20 CAPACITORS 16V 1?F K X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 237 85045090 HQ11801046000 CHIP INDUCTOR 68NH .000930 30000.000000 PCS 27.90 +-5% 100MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 238 85411000 HQ11510289000 ESD LESD11D5.0CT5G .003500 15000.000000 PCS 52.50 15PF DFN0603-D (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 239 85332119 HQ11600003000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 RESISTOR 1/20W 56K 1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 240 85332119 HQ11600009000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000270 45000.000000 PCS 12.15 100K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 241 85332119 HQ11600019000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 1K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 242 85332119 HQ11600054000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 RESISTOR 1/20W 1.5K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 243 85332119 HQ11600223000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000790 15000.000000 PCS 11.85 RESISTOR 1/20W 470K +-1% 0201

ITEM DETAILS (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 244 85332119 HQ11615005000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000310 20000.000000 PCS 6.20 RESISTOR 1/16W 487K +-1% 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 245 85322400 HQ11701282000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000390 30000.000000 PCS 11.70 CAPACITORS 25V 2.7PF +-0.25PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 246 85322400 HQ11701440000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000210 15000.000000 PCS 3.15 CAPACITORS 50V 120PF K X7R0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 247 85322400 HQ11712764000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .019100 20000.000000 PCS 382.00 CAPACITORS 50V 0.01?F +-10%X7R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 248 85045090 HQ11801051000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.2NH .000770 30000.000000 PCS 23.10 +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 249 85411000 HQ11510289000 ESD LESD11D5.0CT5G .003500 15000.000000 PCS 52.50 15PF DFN0603-D (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 250 85411000 HQ11510326000 SMT TVS DIODE .004200 40000.000000 PCS 168.00 LTVS8H4.5CBT5G 70PF SOD882 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 251 85411000 HQ11510478000 SMT TVS DIODE .018700 12000.000000 PCS 224.40 LTVS20H24AT5G 850PF DFN2020-3 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 252 85332119 HQ11600003000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 15000.000000 PCS 4.05 RESISTOR 1/20W 56K 1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 253 85332119 HQ11600009000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000270 30000.000000 PCS 8.10 100K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 254 85332119 HQ11600019000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000270 10000.000000 PCS 2.70 1K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 255 85332119 HQ11600223000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000790 15000.000000 PCS 11.85 RESISTOR 1/20W 470K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 256 85332119 HQ11602963000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W .000150 105000.000000 PCS 15.75 0 J 0201 TA-I (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 257 85332119 HQ11615005000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000310 20000.000000 PCS 6.20 RESISTOR 1/16W 487K +-1% 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 258 85322400 HQ11701278000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001200 60000.000000 PCS 72.00 CAPACITORS 50V 100PF J C0G0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 259 85322400 HQ11701381000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85

ITEM DETAILS CAPACITORS 50V 39PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 260 85322400 HQ11701440000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000210 15000.000000 PCS 3.15 CAPACITORS 50V 120PF K X7R0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 261 85322400 HQ11703534000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000350 15000.000000 PCS 5.25 CAPACITORS 25V 0.0047?F K X7R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 262 85322400 HQ11710027000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001610 20000.000000 PCS 32.20 CAPACITORS 16V 1?F K X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 263 85045090 HQ11801046000 CHIP INDUCTOR 68NH .000930 15000.000000 PCS 13.95 +-5% 100MA 0201 (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 264 85411000 HQ11510277000 SMT TVS DIODE .005600 15000.000000 PCS 84.00 LESD11LL5.0CT5G 0.3PF DFN0603- DL(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 265 85045090 HQ11540050002 CHIP BEAD 1000 .002080 70000.000000 PCS 145.60 100MHZ +-25% 250MA 0402 PD2226(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 266 85332119 HQ11600054000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 15000.000000 PCS 4.05 RESISTOR 1/20W 1.5K +-1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 267 85332119 HQ11600352000 SMT PRECISE CHIP .000270 15000.000000 PCS 4.05 RESISTOR 1/20W 680 +-1% 0201(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 268 85334030 HQ1169002100G SMT THERMISTOR NTC 100K +-1% 4250K 0201 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .007680 30000.000000 PCS 230.40 269 85322400 HQ11701281000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 1?F M(+-20%) X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000570 15000.000000 PCS 8.55 270 85322400 HQ11701282000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 2.7PF +-0.25PF C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000390 15000.000000 PCS 5.85 271 85322400 HQ11701287000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 0.1?F K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000350 15000.000000 PCS 5.25 272 85322400 HQ11701288000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 33PF +-5% C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000170 15000.000000 PCS 2.55 273 85322400 HQ11701291000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 16V 0.1?F +-20%X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000420 15000.000000 PCS 6.30

ITEM DETAILS 274 85322400 HQ11701302000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 82PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000420 60000.000000 PCS 25.20 275 85322400 HQ11701338000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 2200PF K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85 276 85322400 HQ11712240002 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 6.3V 4.7?F M(+-20%) X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001500 20000.000000 PCS 30.00 277 85322400 HQ11712746000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 104 M X5R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .001680 20000.000000 PCS 33.60 278 85322400 HQ11712764000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 50V 0.01?F +-10%X7R 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .019100 20000.000000 PCS 382.00 279 85045090 HQ11801051000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.2NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 280 85423100 HQ11155326000 IC OVP 6.8V 30M SGM40666ASYG/TR WLCSP-1.65?1.24- 12B (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .050500 15000.000000 PCS 757.50 281 85411000 HQ11510927000 ESD ES12DFH 185PF 1?0.6 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .013200 30000.000000 PCS 396.00 282 85412900 HQ16302000110 SMT FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTOR N-CH CJMN3010L DFNWB2?2-6L JSCJ (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .038240 15000.000000 PCS 573.60

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Servi

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 283 85366990 HQ180050001F0 USB SOCKET 3.151A1- .206000 15600.000000 PCS 3213.60 016-8R0 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 284 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .003400 72000.000000 PCS 244.80 SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 285 85366990 HQ11930096000 RF CONNECTORS .016700 10000.000000 PCS 167.00 3.2.08.0740 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 286 85366990 HQ18002000080 EARPHONE SOCKET .037600 15300.000000 PCS 575.28 3.2.11.0482 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 287 85181000 HQ12030132000 MICROPHONE -38DB .081000 11400.000000 PCS 923.40 +-1DB 2.7?1.85?0.9MM SMT BOTAN M (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 288 73209090 HQ12060774000 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP .004540 48000.000000 PCS 217.92 SPRING PIECE 1.85?1.2?1.5 YCUT-FX- EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 289 85340000 HQ18301005B10 BARE PCB BOARD .085000 33600.000000 PCS 2856.00

ITEM DETAILS PD2327FEXNA-0 128.87?105.7?0.5/16 OSP ZHIBOXIN 2# (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE 290 85340000 HQ18301005B10 BARE PCB BOARD .085000 11200.000000 PCS 952.00 PD2327FEXNA-0 128.87?105.7?0.5/16 OSP ZHIBOXIN 2# (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE 291 85340000 HQ18301005B10 BARE PCB BOARD .085000 3200.000000 PCS 272.00 PD2327FEXNA-0 128.87?105.7?0.5/16 OSP ZHIBOXIN 2# (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE 292 85423100 HQ11155326000 IC OVP 6.8V 30M .050500 12000.000000 PCS 606.00 SGM40666ASYG/TR WLCSP-1.65?1.24- 12B (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 293 85411000 HQ11510326000 SMT TVS DIODE .004200 40000.000000 PCS 168.00 LTVS8H4.5CBT5G 70PF SOD882 (FORMFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 294 85411000 HQ11510478000 SMT TVS DIODE .018700 12000.000000 PCS 224.40 LTVS20H24AT5G 850PF DFN2020-3 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 295 85045090 HQ11540050002 CHIP BEAD 1000 .002080 70000.000000 PCS 145.60 100MHZ +-25% 250MA 0402 PD2226(FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 296 85322400 HQ11701278000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .001200 30000.000000 PCS 36.00 CAPACITORS 50V 100PF J C0G0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) 297 85322400 HQ11701302000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC .000420 60000.000000 PCS 25.20 CAPACITORS 50V 82PF J C0G 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE)

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Charges, WS - Warranty Services, OTC - Other Costs, CTH - Customs Tariff Head,

UQC - Unit Quantity Code

Port Code BE No BE Date BE Type BE0050620241752 INDEL4 3841124 05/06/2024 H IEC/Br 0204007445/4 FIRST COPY GSTIN/TYPE 09AACCB1828N1ZG/G

INDIAN CUSTOMS CB CODE AAHCB3410HCH001 TYPE INV ITEM CONT

PORT : NEW CUSTOM HOUSE, IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI - 110037 Nos 1 313 0

BILL OF ENTRY FOR HOME CONSUMPTION PKG 15 G.WT (KGS) 756

PART - II - INVOICE & VALUATION DETAILS (Invoice 1 1 )

INVOICE 1.S.NO 2.INVOICE NO. & DT. 3.PURCHASE ORDER NO & DT 4.LC NO & DATE 5.CONTRACT NO & DATE 1 AL6988ABPL202406 01-JUN-24

1.S NO. 2.CTH 3.DESCRIPTION 4.UNIT PRICE 5.QUANTITY 6.UQC 7.AMOUNT 298 85322400 HQ11701338000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 25V 2200PF K X5R0201 PD2216 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000190 15000.000000 PCS 2.85 299 85045090 HQ11801051000 CHIP INDUCTOR 2.2NH +-0.1NH 600MA 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000770 15000.000000 PCS 11.55 300 85412900 HQ16302000110 SMT FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTOR N-CH CJMN3010L DFNWB2?2-6L JSCJ (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .038240 15000.000000 PCS 573.60 301 85411000 HQ11510289000 ESD LESD11D5.0CT5G 15PF DFN0603-D (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .003500 15000.000000 PCS 52.50 302 85411000 HQ11510927000 ESD ES12DFH 185PF 1?0.6 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .013200 20000.000000 PCS 264.00 303 85332119 HQ11600003000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/20W 56K 1% 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000270 15000.000000 PCS 4.05 304 85332119 HQ11602963000 SMD RESISTOR 1/20W 0 J 0201 TA-I (FOR MFG OFPCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000150 90000.000000 PCS 13.50

ITEM DETAILS 305 85332119 HQ11615005000 SMT PRECISE CHIP RESISTOR 1/16W 487K +-1% 0402 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000310 10000.000000 PCS 3.10 306 85322400 HQ11701291000 MULTILAYER CERAMIC CAPACITORS 16V 0.1?F +-20%X5R 0201 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .000420 15000.000000 PCS 6.30 307 85181000 HQ12030132000 MICROPHONE -38DB +-1DB 2.7?1.85?0.9MM SMT BOTAN M (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .081000 11400.000000 PCS 923.40 308 85366990 HQ18002000080 EARPHONE SOCKET 3.2.11.0482 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .037600 13600.000000 PCS 511.36 309 85366990 HQ180050001F0 USB SOCKET 3.151A1- 016-8R0 (FOR MFG OF PCBA OFCELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .206000 13200.000000 PCS 2719.20 310 73209090 HQ12060774000 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP SPRING PIECE 1.85?1.2?1.5 YCUT-FX- EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .004540 40000.000000 PCS 181.60 311 73209090 HQ26908000200 SMD DOUBLE-LOOP SPRING PIECE MT235 SUS301_EH (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE) .003400 72000.000000 PCS 244.80 312 85340000 HQ18301005B10 BARE PCB BOARD PD2327FEXNA-0 128.87?105.7?0.5/16 OSP ZHIBOXIN 2# (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE .085000 11200.000000 PCS 952.00 313 85340000 HQ18301005B10 BARE PCB BOARD PD2327FEXNA-0 128.87?105.7?0.5/16 OSP ZHIBOXIN 2# (FOR MFG OF PCBA OF CELLULAR MOBILE PHONE .085000 3200.000000 PCS 272.00

GLOSSARY

A : LC - Letter of Credit; B : AD - Authorized Dealer; C : HSS - High Sea Sale; D : C&B Commission & Brokerage, CoC - Cost of Container,CoP - Co

of Packing, HND CHG - Handling Charges, G&S - Goods and Service input cost, DOC CH - Document Charges, CoO - Country of Origin Certificate,

R&LF - Royalty and Licence Fees, LD/ULD - Loading Unloading Char
